                                                Documentof
                                             The World Bank


                                     FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


                                                                              ReportNo. 44351-PE



       INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




                                       PROGRAMDOCUMENT

                                                  FOR A

                                               PROPOSED

                     ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY LOAN

                              INTHE AMOUNT OFUS330MILLION

                                                 TO THE

                                         REPUBLIC OF PERU


                                             January 7,2009




Sustainable Development Department
Bolivia, Ecuador, Peruand Venezuela Country ManagementUnit
LatinAmerica and the CaribbeanRegion



 This document has a restricteddistribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
 their official duties. Its contents may not otherwisebe disclosedwithout World Bank authorization.

              REPUBLIC OF PERUFISCAL YEAR
                          January 1-December 3 1

                   CURRENCYEQUIVALENTS
                (Exchange RateEffective:November 11, 2008)
                        Currency Unit =Nuevos Soles
                         3.09 Nuevos Soles = US$l

                   WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
                              Metric System

             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA       Analytical and Advisory Activities
BCRP      Central Bank of the Republic of Peru
BLL       Blood lead level
CAF       Andean Development Corporation
CEA       Country Environmental Analysis
CNG       Clean natural gas
CONAM     National EnvironmentalCouncil
COSAC     Corridors of highcapacity buses
DDO       Deferred Drawdown Option
DIGESA    General Directorate o f Environmental Health inthe Ministryof Health
DPL       Development Policy Loan
ECAs      Environmental Quality Standards
EIA       Environmental Impact Assessment
EITI      Extractive IndustriesTransparency Initiative
FONAM    National Environmental Fund
FONCOPES  Social Compensation Fund
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GESTA     Grupos de Estudio Te'cnicoAmbiental de la Calidaddel Aire
GOM       Government of Mexico
GoP       Government of Peru
IDB       Inter-American Development Bank
IDF       Institutional Development Fund
IFC       International Finance Corporation
IGP      Peruvian Geophysical Institute
IM        Inspection and Maintenance
IMARPE   Peruvian Oceanic Studies Institute
IMF      International Monetary Fund
INRENA   National Institute o f Natural Resources
JBIC     Japan Bank for International Cooperation
LAC      Latin America Region
LMPs     Maximum PermissibleLevels
LPG      Liquefiedpetroleum gas
MCFM     Million cubic feet per minute
MDG      MillenniumDevelopment Goals
MEF      Ministryof Economy and Finance
MELs     MiningEnvironmental Legacies

MEM        Ministry of Energy and Mines
MINAG      Ministry of Agriculture
MINAM      Ministry of Environment
MINSA      Ministry of Health
M T        Metric tons
MTC        Ministry of Transport and Communications
NCE        National Code for Environment and Natural Resources
NG         Natural Gas
NGO        Non-Governmental Organization
NPA        National ProtectedArea
OEFA       Office of Evaluation and Environmental Enforcement
OPIC       Overseas Private InvestmentCorporation
OSINERGMIN Mining EnforcementAgency
OSINFOR    Forestry EnforcementAgency
PA         ProtectedArea
PAMA       Environmental Management Program
Pb         Lead
PCM        Council of Ministers
PERCAN     Peru-CanadaCooperationProgram
PFM        Public Financial Management
PM         Particulate matter
PPM        Partsper million
PRODUCE    Ministry o f Production
PROFONANPE; PeruvianFund for ProtectedAreas
PSRL        ProgrammaticSocial Reform Loan
REACT      Results and Accountability Project
SENAMHI    National Meteorology and Hydrology Service
SERNANP    National Service of Natural ProtectedAreas
SIAF        Sistema Integrado de Administracidn Financiera
SINANPE    National System of Natural ProtectedAreas
SNIP       National Public Investment System
so2         Sulfur dioxide
TOR         Terms of reference

Pddl        Microgramper deciliter
VIVIENDA    Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation



                   Vice President: Pamela Cox
                 Country Director: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo
                   Sector Director: Laura Tuck
                   Sector Manager: Laura Tlaiye
                     Sector Leader Michel Kerf
                Task Team Leader: Renan Poveda


                                                       PERU
                     ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENTPOLICY LOAN

                                                  CONTENTS


LOANAND PROGRAMSUMMARY                   ........................................................................         i

IINTRODUCTION
 .                   ...........................................................................................         1

I1 COUNTRY CONTEXT
  .                         .....................................................................................        3

  A RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
    .                                                      ........................................................      3

  B.MACROECONOMIC            OUTLOOK          ....................................................................       4

I11 ENVIRONMENTALCHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM
   .                                                                                                             .........7
  A ENHANCING ENVIRONMENTALINSTITUTIONS AND GOVERNANCE
    .                                                                                                      ..............8
 A.1: CREATIONOFA NEWMINISTRY ENVIRONMENT  OF                       ..............................................      1~

 A.2: STRENGTHENINGTHEINSTITUTIONALCAPACITYFORBIODIVERSITY                                    CONSERVATION 12        ...
 A.3: ENHANCINGPOLLUTIONMONITORING ENFORCEMENTCAPACITY
                                                    AND                                         .....................   15

  B MAINSTREAMING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
   .
  INKEY SECTORS       .........................................................................................        16

 B.1 MINING....................................................................................................        16

 B.2 URBANTRANSPORT      ......................................................................................        20

 B.3 FISHERIES
             ..................................................................................................        23

I V BANK SUPPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM
  .                                                                          ......................................     26

  A LINKTO THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
    .                                                                          ....................................     26

  B COLLABORATION WITH IMFAND OTHER DONORS
   .                                                                           ....................................    27

  C RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER BANK OPERATIONS
    .                                                                    ..........................................     28

  D LESSONS LEARNED
    .                        ...................................................................................        28

  E ANALYTICAL UNDERPINNINGS
   .                                           ..................................................................       29

V THE PROPOSEDOPERATION
  .                                      ..................................................................             32

  A OPERATION DESCRIPTION
    .                                   ........................................................................        32

  B POLICY AREAS
   .                  ..........................................................................................        33

  C LOANAMOUNT AND TRANCHING
    .                                              ...............................................................      34

V I OPERATION IMPLEMENTATION
   .                                           ..................................................................       35

  A .POVERTY   AND SOCIAL IMPACTS                 ...............................................................       35

  B ENVIRONMENTALASPECTS
   .                                      .......................................................................       36

  C IMPLEMENTATION MONITORINGAND EVALUATION
    .                                                                             ..................................     37

  D FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS
    .                                       .....................................................................       39

  E DISBURSEMENTSAND AUDITS
   .                                          ....................................................................       41

  F RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION
   .                                         .....................................................................       42

                                                           ANNEXES



Annex 1: Letter of DevelopmentPolicy         ......................................................................................             -46
Annex 2: DevelopmentPolicy Matrix          .........................................................................................             57
Annex 3: Proposed structure of MINAM.........             ..................................................................................     60
Annex 4: Complementary Projectsof the World Bank Group                               ........................................................    61
Annex 5: SocialImpacts associatedwith Mining and FisheriesSectors                                     .........................................  63

Annex 6: Country at a Glance  .............................................................................................................      66
Annex 7: Map IBRD 33465..    ...............................................................................................................     69




The Peru Environmental Development Policy Loan (ENVDPL) was prepared by an IBRD team
consisting of Renan Poveda (Task Team Leader), Andrea Semaan, Anjali Acharya, Juan Carlos
Belausteguigoitia, Glenn Morgan, Dinesh Aryal, Angela Armstrong (LCSEN); Alonso Zarzar (LCSSO);
Rossana Polastri (LCSPE); Lidvard Gronnevet, Kieran Kelleher (ARD); Alberto Ninio (LEGEN);
Fabiola Altimari, Manju Ghumman (LEGLA); Xiomara Morel (LCSFM); Patricia de la Fuente Hoyes
(LOAFC); Elizabeth Huaman, Luis Barrantes (LCC6C); Eduardo Zolezzi (Consultant, LCSEG); Peter
Davis, Maria Chappuis, and Jonathan Cavanagh (Consultants, LCSEN). This operation was undertaken
under the general guidance of Carlos Felipe Jaramillo (Country Director, LCC6C), Laura Tuck (Sector
Director, LCSSD), Laura TIaiye (Sector Manager, LCSEN) Michel Kerf (Sector Leader, LCSSD), Franz
Drees-Gross (Sector Leader, LCSSD), and Abel Mejia (Manager, ETWAA). Peer reviewers were Kirk
Hamilton (Lead Environmental Economist, ENV); John Nash (Lead Economist, LCSSD); Richard
Damania (Lead Environmental Economist, SASDI); Eleodoro Mayorga (Coordinator, COCPO); and
Claudia Sobrevila (Sr. Biodiversity Specialist, ENV).

                                           REPUBLICOF PERU
                        ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENTPOLICY LOAN
                                   LOANAND PROGRAM SUMMARY

Borrower        Republic of Peru
Implementing    Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), with support from the Ministry of Environment
Agency          (MINAM), the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM), the Ministry of Transport and
                Communications (MTC), and the Ministry of Production(PRODUCE).
FinancingData   IBRD
                Terms: Fixed Spread Loan (FSL) in US Dollars payable in 21.5 years, including a 13.5 year
                grace period.
                Amount: US$330million
OperationType   Programmatic (first of three). GOP has elected a Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO) as the
                disbursement mode for this operation. An initial disbursement of US$20 million is
                expected upon effectiveness (by mid-2009).
Main Policy     The policy areas addressed by this loan are: (1) institutional strengthening for environmental
Areas           governance, including regulation and enforcement; and (2) mainstreaming of environmental
                sustainability principles in the mining, fisheries, and urban transport and energy sectors.
Key Outcome     Improvements to Environmental Governance would be evidenced by the following: (i)
Indicators      MINAM reviews Environmental Impact Assessments (ELAs) for at least 10 large
                infrastructurehvestment projects. with potentially significant impacts per year; (ii)
                SERNANP applies financial strategy to increase funding for managing protected areas (PAS)
                from various sources (including private sector) by at least US$2 million per year; and (iii)air
                quality data for the Lima-Calla0 Metropolitan Region is widely published and disseminated
                (in real time) through an integrated monitoring network. Air quality contingency plans are
                developed and implemented (when pollution levels largely exceed quality standards) in the 5
                most polluted cities in Peru: Lima, Arequipa, Chimbote, 110, and La Oroya.
                Sustainable Management of the Mining Sector would be evidenced by the following: (i)At
                least ten priority mining environmental legacies (MELs) are identified following the priority
                setting update of the MELs inventory and resources for remediatingthem is confirmed; and
                (ii)Environmentalparticipatorymonitoring is undertakeninat least60miningsites.
                Strengthening Efforts to Improve Air Quality as evidenced by the following: (i)At least
                80,000 vehicles convertedto Natural Gas (NG) and 90 service stations are installed and
                operatingsupplying NG in Lima; (ii)At least 30 percent of gas stations (approx. 750) in main
                cities supplying clean diesel (with less than 50ppm of sulfur content) by 2010; and (iii)
                Vehicle inspectionand maintenance system operating in Lima and in the three largestcities.
                Enhancement of Sustainable Fisheries as evidenced by the following: (i)100 percent of
                anchoveta fleet under the quota system; and (ii)at least 5,000 workers benefit from economic
                incentives for leavingcommercialfishing.
Program         The proposed Environmental Development Policy Loan Program (ENVDPL) aims at
Development     supportingthe government'sefforts to strengthenenvironmentalgovernance and institutions in
Objertive(s)    Peru, and mainstream environmental sustainability in the development agenda of key sectors
and             (mining, fisheries, and urban transport and energy). The ENVDPL promotes improvements in
Contribution to health particularly of the poor who are exposed to the highest risks from environmental
CAS             degradation. The ENVDPL is consistent with one of the key pillars of the 2006 Country
                Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Peru for FY07-FYI1 (and the 2009 CPS progress report) laying
                out a strategy to support the GoP to achieve its goals of sustained economic growth. The CPS
                recognizes the need to raise the profile of environmental issues in Peru by enhancing



                                                       1

               environmentalpublic investments and strengthening the institutionalframework. In support of
              the CPS' pillar (i) on economic growth, the ENVDPL program will contribute to making
              growth environmentally sustainable by supporting the environmental legal and institutional
               framework, biodiversity conservation, enhancing control over air and water pollution,
               improvingthe sustainability of the mining sector and the sustainable management of fisheries
               resources. In addition, by supportingthe policy instruments of the newly created Ministry of
               Environment (MINAM), the ENVDPL would contribute to the modernization of the state
               institutions (CPS pillar iii).
Risksand Risks The following risks and mitigation measures have been identified: (i)macroeconomic risks
Mitigation    related to Peru's vulnerability to changing international conditions. While the near-term
              outlook for Peru has changed in light of the global economic downturn, it remains positive.
               This is a moderate risk and Peru is facing the global financial downturn with strong
              macroeconomic indicators and sound policies in place which include: (a) easing monetary
               policy; (b) interventionsin foreign exchange market; (c) counter-cyclicalfiscal'policy; and (d)
               incentives to sustain private investments; (ii) Possible decreased requestsfor loans in this
              programmatic series by the COPin mid-term, which could affect the future Environmental
              DPLs and policy dialogue.The risk of a potential disruption in the policy dialogue would be
               mitigatedby the Bank's ongoingwork program in the key sectors; (iii) The ruling party has a
              minority in Congress which could create difficulties in passing legislation. This is a low risk
               for the DPL series since all of the Legislative Decrees relatingto this program have already
              been passed, and the pending regulations depend on the executive branch for approval. There
               i s also a low risk that there could be a challenge by Congress to Legislative Decree 1084,
              which establishes vessel quotas for the anchoveta fleet and to the Legislative Decree 1013,
              which establishes the creation of MINAM; (iv) Institutional risks includingchanges affecting
              the legitimacyand legal status of the newly createdMINAM as well as limited resources, weak
              capacity and an overall redefinition of roles by MINAM. This risk is being addressed by the
              proactive liaising of the Minister of Environment with members of Congress. The Congress
              recently approved MINAM's operating budget; and MEF has more than doubled its operating
              budget. In addition, the proposed DPL (and an associated IDF grant) would help mitigate this
               risk by enhancing capacity in key areas (such as FM management and Monitoring and
               Evaluation) and in the definition of roles and responsibilities; and (v) Sector speczjic risks,
               particularly with regard to the commitment to address Mining Environmental Legacies
               (MELs), and changes of the Legislative Decree (1084) establishing vessel quotas for the
              anchovetafleet for the fisheries sector. In the case of mining legacies the Ministry of Energy
               and Mines (MEM) has endorsed a methodology to identify the priority sites and has allocated
              funds for the remediation of MELs; and in the case of the fisheries sector, PRODUCE is
              actively engaging in discussions with potentially affected fishermen to explain the social
              benefit measures and thereby reducing the risk of a potential backsliding on the Legislative
              Decree. Implementation of the Inspection and Maintenance (IM) System in the Lima
              Metropolitan Region. MTC publishedregulation No025 in August 2008 establishingthe rules,
              control and responsibilities for the IM program for Lima. Since the MTC has assumed the
              oversightof the-IMsystem, implementationhas beencarriedout ina satisfactorymanner.
OperationID   P101471




                                                    ..
                                                    11

                                    IBRD PROGRAM DOCUMENT
         FOR A PROPOSEDENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY LOAN
                                     TO THE REPUBLIC OF PERU

                                         I. INTRODUCTION

1.       The government of Peru (GoP) has requested the proposed Environmental
Development Policy Loan (ENVDPL) for US330 million, as the first of three operations
aimed at supporting the government's efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness o f
environmental governance and institutions in Peru; and mainstream environmental sustainability
into the development agenda o f key sectors (mining, urban transport, and fisheries). GoP has
elected a Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO) as a disbursement option.' This instrument will
allow the GoP to pro-actively manage risk in light o f the current global financial downturn or a
shift in the favorable external circumstances driving Peru's growth, beyond the country's
currently available risk management tools. The ENVDPL i s one o f the key pillars o f the 2006
Country Partnership Strategy for Peru, and o f the government's strategy to strengthen its
sustainable development policies, and will contribute to Peru's efforts towards achieving the
MillenniumDevelopment Goals (MDGs).*The proposed policy reforms and activities under the
ENVDPL program are based on two core pieces o f analytical work: (i)the Environmental and
Social Dimensions o f the Mining Sector in Peru (2005); and (ii)             the PeruCountry Environmental
Analysis (CEA, 2006).

2.       Over the past few decades, Peru has adopted numerous policy initiatives and taken
measures to build institutional capacity to protect the environment and manage its natural
resources. Environmental quality and natural resource abundance are an integral part o f the
country's sustainable growth and the well-being o f its population. In spite o f these noteworthy
efforts, however, Peru continues to face serious challenges and threats to its air, water resources,
land and biodiversity, compromising its potential for growth. The costs o f environmental
degradation are estimated at more than 3.9 percent o f the country's GDP per year, mainly due to
increasedmorbidity and mortality and decreasedproductivity.

3.       Recent events have renewed public attention to the consequences of environmen'tal
degradation and depletion of natural resources. The media have provided extensive coverage
o f pollution from the country's mining environmental legacies (MELs) which have become the
source o f many o f the social conflicts inthe country. Similarly, the highlead concentration levels
in the blood of the population at La Oroya have caused an international outcry. The mining
smelter places this highland town o f 30,000 inhabitants on the list o f the ten most polluted places



I Peru is an appropriate middle income country candidate for a DDO since it fulfills the main conditions stipulated
by Bank policy including: (i)macroeconomicpolicies that have been disciplined and steady; (ii)Peru is in excellent
standing in the international markets, as evidenced by the positive outlook of rating agencies, reflected in Fitch's
recently granting investment grade to Peru; and (iii)the proposed DDO is included within the overall CPS lending
envelope and partnershipstrategy.
* Theproposed ENVDPL programwould contribute to the attainmento f MD Goal 7, which seeks the attainmentof
environmentalsustainability, and Target 9, which promotes principles o f sustainable developmentin country policies
and programs.

                                                         1

on the planetq3The devastating effect o f natural disasters associated with the occurrence of El
NiAo in 1998 and the recent collapse o f the hake fisheries as well as the challenges to the
anchoveta fisheries have also triggered short-term institutional responsesto these issues.

4.       In response to growingpublic awareness about the need to address Peru's mounting
environmentalchallenges, the Ministry of Environment (MINAM)4was created earlier this
year, thereby elevating its position in the hierarchy of the country's government. Over the
past decade, Peru has made progress in improving its institutional and legal framework for
environmental management, which includes enacting laws on environmental licensing and
strengthening the environmental units and functions for some sectors. Together with these
advances, the key factors contributing to MINAM's creation included: (i)a growing awareness in
the public and private sectors o f increasingly severe environmental issues; (ii)indirect pressure
within the framework o f negotiations o f the Free Trade Agreement (FTA); and, (iii)a growing
concern from civil society, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the international donor
community (including the Bank) about the need for a strong environmental authority to balance
the unprecedented growth and its associated environmental impacts. The timing of this loan is
therefore particularly opportune in that it supports the early and critical stages o f MINAM's
development and the continuation o f environmental policy reforms.

5.       The selection of key sectors and priority areas to be addressed by the proposed
ENVDPL has been based on Bank analytical work and a comprehensive series of
consultations led by Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), with the inputs and active
participation o f various government agencies' as well as consultations with other donors6 to
avoid duplication of efforts and ensure compatibility with other programs. The core sectors and
themes to be supported by this DPL were selected based on the following: (i)                 a level o f national
priority agreed on by MEF and MINAM7;(ii)supplementary support from other loandgrants;'
and (iii)the level o f sectoral support and commitment. Consequently, the final selection o f
sectors to be supported (mining, fisheries, transport and fuels related to air quality improvements)
reflect a cohesive strategy which would: (i)promote principles o f sustainability and address core
environmental issues in two high-growth, natural resource-based, and leading export sectors


3Accordingto the BlacksmithInstitute,La Oroya is the only site in the Americas in the Top Ten Most Polluted
Places inthe World list (http://www.blacksmithinstitute.ora/ten.uhu).
4MINAM will concentrate and organize many of the responsibilities for environmentalmanagement, which until
now had been shared by more than a dozen agencies includingthe NationalCouncil for the Environment (CONAM),
the NationalInstitute ofNaturalResources (INRENA), the General Directorate for Environmental Health
(DIGESA), and sectoral environmental agencies. Furthermore, a new environmental enforcement agency has been
establishedunder the Office of Evaluation and Environmental Enforcement (OEFA), and the NationalService of
ProtectedAreas (SERNANP) has been createdas an independent agency under MINAM.
 These include (i)MINAM; (ii) CONAM); (iii) INRENA; (iv) DIGESA; (v) MEM; (vi) the Ministry of Production
(PRODUCE); and (vii) the Ministry ofHousing (VIVIENDA).
6These include the Inter-AmericanDevelopment Bank (IDB), the Andean Development Corporation (CAF),the
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), and the Peru-Canada(PERCAN) Initiative.
7Some important areas such as natural disastersand indoor air pollution, identifiedas prominent contributors to
costs of environmentaldegradationwere not selectedby the authorities.
8Issues such as water resourcemanagement(identifiedas critical in the PeruCEA) are not included in the proposed
ENVDPL as they are already being addressed by two separate IDB DPLs and an upcoming World Bank TA loan,
and forest policy is being coveredwithin the framework of the FTA and through an Andean Development
Corporation(CAF) loan.

                                                        2

(mining and fisheries); (ii)address poor air quality identified as one of the leading causes of
morbidity and mortality inthe country (particularly inlarge cities); and (iii)           strengthenthe overall
environmental institutional and policy framework supporting MINAM's new responsibilities in
policy making; biodiversity conservation; regulating the environmental licensing process; and
environmental enforcement. A recently approved Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant
would also contribute in strengthening MINAM's environmental management capacity `and to
monitor the implementation of specific measures and reforms to be undertaken by the DPL
program.

                                          11.   COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

6.        Economic growth has remained high and broad based in the past six years and has
been accompanied by public sector surpluses, relatively low inflation, high levels of
internationalreserves and a manageableexternal current account. Inaddition, vulnerability
indicators have improved significantly in recent years, with a declining public debt to GDP ratio
and a strengthened financial sector. Growth has been led by domestic demand, with both
consumption and investment expanding at high rates. In 2008, two rating agencies, Fitch and
Standard and Poor's, upgraded Peru's sovereign debt to investment grade status. Commodity
windfalls have been saved into a Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which provides room for conducting
countercyclical fiscal policy if needed. Finally, sustained growth i s having an impact on poverty,
as witnessed by the decline of almost 10 percentage points in poverty rates between 2005 and
2007. Employment growth figures also support this trend.

                                        Table 1. Key EconomicIndicators
                                                   2005     2006     2007   2008e     2009p      2010p    2011p
Annual GDP growth rate                              6.4      7.6      9.0    9.3       6.0        5.5       5.5
Real Domestic Demand                                5.7      10.3    11.8    13.2      5.9        7.1       7.6
 of which: Private sector                           5.9      9.0     11.4    13.1      5.2        8.1       8.0
Inflation rate, CPI (end o f period)                1.5      1.1      3.9   5.5-6     2.5-3      2-2.5      2.0
Inflation rate, CPI (average)                       1.6      2.0      I.8    5.7       4.4        3.3       2.4

NFPS BalanceiGDP                                   -0.3      2.1      3. I   2.4        1.1       0.9       2.2
Public Sector DebtiGDP                             37.8     32.7     29.2    23.3     22.2        20.0     17.4

Exports(FOB); change p.a.                          35.0     37.0     17.5    16.4      8.7        10.8     10.2
Imports (CIF); change p.a.                         23.0     23.0     31.8    47.3      2.8        12.4     12.4
Trade Balance/GDP                                   6.4      9.6      7.7    2.8       0.0        -0.3      1.4
External Current AccountGDP                         1.4      2.8      1.4    -3.2      -3.0       -3.0     -2.2
Terms of Trade (deterioration -)                    5.6     27.4      3.6    -4.7      -8.3       -1.6     -4.0

NetInternational Reserves
 US$billion                                        14.1      17.3    27.7    33.7     33.9        34.1     32.1
 Percent o f short-term external debt              311.4    182.4    456.1  473.7     349.9      378.9     356.7
 Percent of foreign currency deposits at banks     125.9    151.7    208.5   199.1    198.7      199.9     242.5

Source: Ministry of Economyand Finance, Central Bank of Peru and IMF.
Source: Banco Central de Reserva del Perli (BCRP), MEF (Revised Marco Macroeconomico Multi-anual2009-2011)and IMF
projections

7.        Inflation has surged since mid-2007, reflecting rising international food and fuel
prices and domestic demand pressures. The implementation of the inflation-targeting

                                                           3

 framework has been successful in reducing inflation and anchoring expectations. Recently,
 however, inflation has become a source o f concern for the authorities, as for many countries in
 the region. Since October 2007, inflation has remained above the BCRP's inflation target of 1-3
 percent, closing end-2007 at 3.9 percent. Since January 2008 inflation has continued on an
 upward trend, reaching 6.2 percent in September. However, food and fuel prices have been
 falling since August 2008; this will help to bring inflation back towards target in the medium-
 term.

 8.       Externalvulnerability indicators have improved in recent years. The strength of the
 trade accounts has led to a hefty international reserve position (33 US $ billions, about 26 % o f
 GDP). The current account i s expected to deteriorate in 2008 and 2009, and financing it will
 depend on maintaining a reasonable amount o f FDI inflows. Ongoing large-scale investment
 projects are expected to continue contributing strongly to growth in coming years. Prudent fiscal
 policy and strategic debt management have improved significantly Peru's public debt burden
 indicators. As a result, Dominion Bond Rating Service, Fitch Ratings and Standard and Poor
 have granted investment grade status to Perug. The country's excellent economic performance
 has led Standard & Poor's Ratings Services in July 2008 to raise its foreign currency long-term
 credit rating for Peru to 'BBB-' from 'BB+' and raise its local currency long-term credit rating to
 'BBB+'from 'BBB-'

 9.       The high growth of the lastyears has had a positiveimpact on reducingpoverty and
 social vulnerabilities. Recent years have witnessed a significant decline in poverty with
 particularly encouraging results in 2007. The national poverty rate dropped by 9.3 percentage
 points between 2004 and 2007, from 48.6 percent to 39.3 percent in 2007. While this trend bodes
 well for a continuation -of declines in poverty, recent developments with respect to inflation
 (particularly food inflation) call for closer monitoring o f poverty trends in 2008. The government,
 though, has already taken important actions to protect the poor from the impact o f food inflation.

                                       Table 2. PovertyRates,2004-2007

 Region                 2004      2005      2006  2007   Region              2004  2005   2006  2007
 Total                   48.6     48.7      44.5  39.3   Total                17.1  17.4   16.1  13.7
 Urban Coast             37.1     32.3      29.9  25.1   Urban Coast          5.6    4.0   3.0   2.1
 Rural Coast             51.2     50.0      49.0  38.1   Rural Coast          13.8  13.4   14.4  10.5
 Urban Sierra            44.8     44.4      40.2  36.3   Urban Sierra         13.6  11.6   10.3  8.5
 Rural Sierra            75.8     77.3      76.5  73.3   Rural Sierra        44.0   46.6   46.5  40.8
 Urban Selva             50.4     53.9      49.9  40.3   Urban Selva          18.7  22.5   18.1  11.0
IRural Selva             63.8     65.6      62.3  55.3   Rural Selva         30.4    28    24.6  23.4
 Metropolitan Lima       30.9     32.6      24.2  18.5   Metropolitan Lima    1.3   2.0    0.9   0.5   1
 Source: National Institute of Statistics (INEI).

 B. MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK

 10.      Peru's economic performance remains unabated in 2008, in spite of deteriorating
 external conditions. Growth for 2008 has been revised upwards from 8.5 percent to 9.3




                                                       4

percent," led by booming domestic demand, which i s a reflection o f surging investments
(particularly in mining and construction), strong credit expansion and sustained public
expenditures. As a result, Peru is currently among the fastest growing economies in Latin
America and Caribbean region and enjoys one o f the lowest inflation rates.                        Inflationary
pressures remained in 2008, but are expected to recede with the recent decline in agricultural
commodity and international fuel prices. The recent update by the Ministry o f Economy and
Finance (MEF) on fiscal accounts for 2008 point to a slightly larger public sector surplus,
supported by higher estimates o f tax revenues. Accounting for the deterioration interms o f trade,
the current account balance forecast has shifted to a deficit o f 3.2 percent o f GDP for 2008, from
the 1.3 percent o f GDP previously estimated.

11.     While the near-term outlook for Peru has changed in light of the global economic
downturn, it remains positive provided sound policies continue and timely financing is
available in the event the global economic downturn intensifies beyond expectations. The
medium term outlook presented in Table 1 reflects the more challenging external environment,
namely lower global growth, lower commodity prices and higher risk aversion.                          Although
positive, the outlook for coming years faces external downside risks. Economic activity for 2009-
2011 i s expected to slow down, but growth will remain at reasonable robust rates. The ongoing
credit growth moderation, falling commodity prices and the recessionary risks o f developed
economies will affect growth prospects. Growth forecasts have been moderated to about 6 - 6.5
percent for the period 2009-11, below the potential 7 percent GDP growth estimated by the
Central Bank o f Peru (BCRP). Fiscal revenues will be affected by lower commodity prices and
lower global demand, as one third o f tax revenues are commodity related. Fiscal balances will
remain posting surpluses, but at lower levels than in previous years. The fiscal surplus forecast
for 2009 has been revised downwards to 1.4 percent o f GDP (from 2.3 percent o f GDP in the
budget plan). The external current account will most likely remain in deficit at about 3 percent
o f GDP in the near term. Hefty international reserve accumulation provides comfortable room
for financing deficits o f the order forecasted under the base scenario.

12.     Strong growth, fiscal surpluses and active liability management have contributedto
a steady decline in debt stock. The country's debt service profile and its currency and interest
risk exposures have improved significantly as a result of the GoP's ample access to various
funding sources, as well as an active policy o f liability management. The public sector debt-to-
GDP ratio has steadily decreased from 44 percent in 2004 to 30 percent in 2007, and is projected
to drop to 23 percent o f GDP in 2008. The public debt position i s resilient to standard interest
rate and exchange rate shocks, and debt sustainability i s not a concern in the mediumterm, even
after accounting for latest global economic' developments. Peru's medium-term fiscal stance
relies on external financing. Under the assumption o f compliance with the fiscal deficit targets
o f the Fiscal Transparency and Responsibility Law (FTRL) and average growth o f 5.7 percent
during 2009-10, Peru's financing needs will be approximately US$1.5 billion, o f which US$200
million is expected to be budget support.




loGrowth for the first halfof 2008 was 10.3 percent on an annual basis.July and August postingswere 8.3 percent
and 8.9 percent, respectively.

                                                        5

13.     IMF relationship: In January 2007, Peru signed a 25-month Stand-By Arrangement
in the amount equivalent to SDR 172.4 million (27 percent of quota) with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF). The program has been on track and third review of Peru's economic
performance under the arrangement was completed by the IMF Board on July 24, 2008. The
Peruvian authorities have treated the arrangement as precautionary and have not made any
drawings, as was the case in the two previous ones. The fourth review Board discussion i s
tentatively scheduled for early 2009.

14.     In addition to the strong macroeconomic indicators referenced above GoP has
announced and implemented a number of policy measures to maintain confidence and
mitigate the foreseen adverse impact that the global crisis could have on economic activity.
These measures include:

        Easing monetary policy: The Central Reserve Bank o f Peru (BCRP) has increased
        liquidity facilities to avoid a potential credit squeeze, includingthe creation o f rep0 loans
        in US dollars with CDs as collateral, and resumed issuance of U S dollar-linked CDs.
        Additionally BCRP announced legislation that will allow institutions like pension funds
        to participate in these rep0 operations. BCRP has also redhced the marginal reserve
        requirements on both local and foreign currency deposits. Reserve requirements o f 9
       percent on long-term foreign capital inflows (above two years) were recently eliminated.
        The reserve requirement on US dollar denominated accounts was reduced from 49
       percent to 35 percent.

    0   Intervention in the foreign exchange market: The Peruvian Sol depreciated by 3
       percent since August 2008, after a lengthy period o f moderate appreciation pressures.
        BCRP has intervened in the foreign exchange market to smooth out fluctuations and
       prevent a rapid depreciation o f the currency, using nearly US$4.5 billion in the last two
        months.    In the event o f further depreciation pressures, BCRP has enough room to
        intervene as international reserves currently stand at US$32 billion or 24 percent o f GDP
        (as of October 3 1).

    0   Counter cyclical fiscal policy: The authorities have announced that they intendto adjust
        the level of public expenditures to support a growth rate target of at least 6 percent per
       year for 2009-10.       Under this scenario, public investments would be accelerated as
        needed, and more funds would be allocated to social and infrastructure expenditures, with
        emphasis on those programs that have a direct impact on vulnerable families. While in a
       base scenario, such a boost in expenditures may not require incurring a fiscal deficit,
        authorities are making arrangements to secure contingent lines o f credit from
        international financial institutions in case access to bond markets remains costly. In the
        short term, authorities have announced their intention to explore long-term bond issuance
        ifwindows ofopportunity arise.

       Measures to sustain private investment: In addition to the above, the government is
       working to ensure that private investment flows are not affected significantly by changing
       risk perceptions. In coordination with private commercial banks, authorities are
        identifying financial mechanismsthat would prevent a significant reduction in lending for
       investmentsin equipment, capacity expansion and construction. Talks are underway with
       the International Finance Corporation (IFC) to intensify its active presence in Peru


                                                    6

         through equity investments, long term funding, mobilization and issuance o f partial
         guarantees to cover risks. Other institutions that have announced their intention to
         collaborate in these efforts include the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the
         Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), and the Japan Bank for International
         Cooperation (JBIC). Public financial institutions would also continue channeling
         resourcesto productive sectors.



111.     ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM

15.      The most significanteconomic costs of environmentaldamage in Peruare associated
with outdoor air pollution and lead exposure in urban areas, inadequate water supply,
sanitation and hygiene, followed by natural disasters, indoor air pollution and agricultural soil
degradation which, as illustrated in Figure 1, account for 8.2 billion soles or equivalent to 3.9
percent of GDP in 2003 as a result of increased morbidity and mortality and decreased economic
productivity."         The burden o f these costs falls heavily on the most vulnerable groups.
Environmental health impacts often have more severe repercussions on the poor and on children
under five than on the non-poor, because the latter tend to have more resources to cope with such
threats, such as better access to health services and better health in general. Thus any
interventions or reforms to strengthen environmental management are likely to have a direct
influence on the lives o f Peru's most vulnerable populations.

                           Figure 1: Annual Cost of Environmental Damage (Billions of Soles per year)

        3 0


        2.5


        2.0


        1.5

        1.o


        0.5


        0.0
               Outdoor air     Water supply,  Natural disasters Indoor air pollution Soil degradation  Deforestation Municipal w aste
            pollution (PM) and sanitation and                                                                          collection
                lead (pb)        hygiene
                exposure


Source: Larsen and Strukova (2006)

16.      In addition to urban environmental challenges, natural resources are currently
under pressure. Peru's economy is highly dependent on its rich natural resource base. The
extraction and export o f its natural resources (guano, minerals, agricultural products,
hydrocarbons, rubber, fisheries, and wood) have been central at different times in the history o f


I'Larsen B. and Struckova, E (2006) Peru: Cost of EnvironmentalDamage. A Socio-Economic and Environmental
Health Risk Assessment. The methodologyappliedto this study focused on health-relatedeconomic impacts.Thus,
the irreversibledegradationof soils, forest cover and biodiversity loss, has a lower estimate in the assessment done
on costs of environmentaldegradation.

                                                                    7

the country's economic development and have influenced its socio-economic structure. With the
exploitation o f natural resources remaining very important to Peru's economy, threats to its
natural resource base i s a core development challenge. Some o f Peru's natural resources, for
instance, are under threat from multiple causes such as increasing migration to the eastern
Amazon region, illegal logging and mining, hydrocarbon activities, overfishing, and road and
infrastructure development which threaten endangered species in the Amazon region. The
Interoceanic highway, linking Brazil to the Pacific coast, i s likely to exacerbate some o f the
impacts in the Amazon region. The proposed ENVDPL would help the environmental authority
become more effective in its enforcement activities, and in seeking compliance with mitigating
measures to minimize the overall impact o f this and other large infrastructure projects.

17.     The GoP has embarked on an extensive reform program aimed at enhancing the
country's competitiveness and stimulating economic growth.I2At the core o f this program,
the GoP acknowledges significant potential linkages between environment, competitiveness and
economic growth. These potential linkages are evident in: (i)the opportunity to employ Peru's
richly endowed natural resources as a competitive advantage to meet the demands o f more
selective and lucrative markets; (ii)  the need for government interventions to address the inability
o f the market to mitigate and reverse the negative impacts o f environmental degradation on
human health, productivity, and competitiveness; and (iii)the costs required to address
environmental degradation and unsustainable use o f natural resources could crowd out other
significant social investments, which could undermine long-term macroeconomic stability.
Consequently, supporting environmental policy reforms to protect the environment and preserve
its natural resources over the long-run i s a complement to sound macroeconomic policies that
would permit sustained growth.


A. ENHANCING ENVIRONMENTAL INSTITUTIONS AND GOVERNANCE

18.      Peru is consolidatingan organizationalstructure more capable of respondingto the
country's environmentalchallenges. Prior to the creation o f MINAM, the core responsibilities
for environmental management had been shared by more than a dozen agencies, including the
National Environmental Council (CONAM), the National Institute o f Natural Resources
(INRENA), the General Directorate of Environmental Health (DIGESA), and sectoral
environmental agencies, which diluted overall efficiency and often resulted in a duplication o f
functions. Until now, the organizational structure had faced severe limitations that hindered an
efficient response to the country's current and future environmental challenges. Those limitations
stemmedmainly from: (a) the lack of an integrated environmental planning system; (b) the lack
o f sufficient technical and management capacity; (c) weak accountability and monitoring and
enforcement capabilities; and (d) the lack o f financial and human resources. In 1994, the
National Council for the Environment (CONAM) was established as a coordinating body with a
mandate to propose, manage and evaluate national environmental policy. Nonetheless, one o f
CONAM's biggest challenges was to resolve overlapping and/or ambiguous environmental
mandates between Peru's public institutions and to promote further coordination. Institutional
ambiguity associated with overlapping jurisdiction often resulted in delays in addressing key


I2As per its commitmentsto the Second ProgrammaticFiscalManagement and CompetitivenessDPL.

                                                    8

issues with environmental and social costs. Lack o f coordination among agencies also sent mixed
messages to sectors and hindered the adoption o f efficiency improvements. Biodiversity
conservation was one o f the few areas that raised considerable funding due to external financing.

19.     The lack of planning and management capacity has constituted a fundamental
challenge in terms of implementing environmental regulations and plans. Most entities
working on environmental issues have had to cope with inadequate public funding and have
depended mainly on resources provided by the donor community. Technical and human resource
capacities have also varied from one agency to another. Some entities, including DIGESA, have
been affected by the downsizing o f the public sector, while others, like CONAM, have lacked a
critical mass o f human resources to analyze and formulate environmental policies in highly
complex sectors. Peru's "sectorized"        approach to environmental management has also
exacerbated these problems, because agencies had, until now, focused on promoting their
specific sectoral interests without necessarily fulfilling environmental commitments, applying
principles o f sustainability to specific investments, or addressing environmental problems that
required a multi-sectoral approach.

20.     Furthermore,the absence of a formal mechanism for environmentalpriority setting
has been associated with inadequate funding for the environmental sector and reductions
in the national government's total environmental expenditure. For instance, between 1999
and 2005, annual environmental expenditure averaged around 0.01 percent o f GDP. Thus,
resources allocated for environmental protection represented a small fraction o f the estimated
costs o f environmental degradation and are low by international standards, particularly when
compared to other countries in the region (e.g., in 2006 CONAM's operating budget was close to
US$3 million while El Salvador, a country significantly smaller in size and in economic terms,
allocated US$ 5.3 million to its Ministry o f Environment). Peru's declining budget allocations
for the environmental sector have taken place within a favorable economic context and could
therefore indicate a relative loss o f importance o f the environmental agenda relative to other
social concerns. Ensuring adequate funding for the environmental sector from the national budget
(as well as from additional sources) i s essential to developing the necessary capacity to address
Peru's most pressing environmental concerns. MINAM's approved budget for 2009 i s in the
order o f US$11.6 million.

21.     The new Ministry of Environment will need to champion reforms in the areas o f (a)
accountability; (b) updating o f environmental quality standards; (c) environmental monitoring
capacity; (d) environmental licensing; and (e) environmental enforcement. Accountability has
been weak due to: (i) absence of clear responsibilities and capacities among agencies; (ii)
                       the                                                                      the
lack o f an effective voice for the poor, stemming from a lack o f awareness and the absence o f
sound mechanisms for public participation; and (iii)a diluted government commitment to
remediating environmental problems. Monitoring capacity has been constrained by: (i)a lack o f
reliable and updated environmental quality standards (ECAs) and permissible emission levels
(LMPs); (ii)missing time series data and baselines on the state o f the environment and natural
resources; (iii)the absence o f a system o f results-focused indicators o f environmental quality;
(iv) a deficient communications strategy whereby key information is not shared with decision
makers (government agencies and the public in general); and (v) a lack o f resources to ensure an
adequate institutional presence in the field. Environmental licensing has been constrained by: (i)


                                                 9

the uneven capacity ineach sector to process environmental impact assessments (EIA) and issue
timely environmental licenses; (ii) weak role o f INRENA and CONAM inthe review process
                                     the
o f EIAs; (iii)EIAs have turned into a bureaucratic obstacle for projects with minimal
environmental impacts, while constraining its use as a decision-making tool for managing and
resolving complex environmental and social issues; and (iv) the weak enforcement o f EIA
commitments. Enforcement has been sub-optimal mostly because the enforcement power has
ultimately rested with the same ministries that are responsible for promoting sector investments
and development, but also because quality standards still need to be defined in many areas. In
addition, there has been a lack o f efforts to link monitoring data with contingency planning and
enforcement. The proposed ENVDPL would contribute to strengthening each o f these areas.

Government'sProgram

22.      Peru has responded to its environmental challenges by developing environmental
management instruments.          One o f the key features o f the 1990 National Code o f the
Environment (NCE), was the introduction o f environmental impact assessments (EIA), which
previously did not exist in Peru. The EIA framework has placed the onus on the issuance o f
environmental licenses in each sector (until recently, INRENA was responsible for commenting
on the EIA only for those projects which could have an impact on protected areas and natural
resources). Likewise the legal framework also included mechanisms (such as audits and
environmental management and adaptation plans - PAMA) to monitor and penalize ongoing
enterprises (particularly mining) which do not meet environmental standards. Thus, while the
evolution o f environmental management in Peru has not been smooth, there has been significant
progress (particularly in the last few years) in developing command and control environmental
management instruments and raising awareness (both within government and with the public) on
environmental issues. Progress-hasalso been made with the development o f the basis for a sound
institutional and legal framework to address Peru's environmental challenges.

23.      The GoP is undertaking several measures to clarify the roles and responsibilities,
and strengthen the overall institutional and environmental management framework. For
the short and mediumterm, GoP will carry out the enactment ofthe regulationwhich defines the
scope, sectors and priority areas to be monitored and enforced by the Office o f Evaluation and
Environmental Enforcement (OEFA). This would reinforce the overall environmental
enforcement framework and would clarify OEFA's role vis 2r vis other sectors, and the nature and
range o f areas to be monitored and enforced. Furthermore, the development and implementation
o f performance indicators for OEFA's environmental enforcement would be developed; (ii)       the
enactment o f regulation clarifying the internal functions o f the Ministry o f Environment and its
operating role vis-&vis key sectors and Regional Governments, and ultimately the promotion o f
technical assistance and exchanges by MINAM to regional governments; and (iii)adoption o f
performance indicators and o f an action plan for the establishment o f a results-based financial
management system, and a monitoring system to link MINAM's projects and programs with its
priorities and with specific quality targets and goals.




                                                  10

A.1: CREATION OF A NEW       MINISTRY ENVIRONMENT
                                        OF

24.     The recently created Ministry of Environment (MINAM) represents a noteworthy
commitment by GoP to environmental management. On December 2007, President Garcia
announced the creation of a Ministry of Environment. After a four-month consultation process
with various stakeholders from the private sector, academia, international organizations,
government and NGOs, the Ministry o f Environment was created by an extraordinary executive
decree on May 14, 2008. Furthermore, the recent budget allocation for MINAM i s more than
double the annual resources that used to be allocated to CONAM (US$11.6 million vs.
US$Smillion), not counting the resources o f its subsidiary autonomous environmental agencies
(which add up to more than US$30 million for 2009). While the budget i s still low relative to
other countries, it demonstrates a significant improvement over previous years and a commitment
to the functionality o f the new environmental institutional framework.

25.     The new Ministry is bound to face normal start-up challenges in defining its
functions vis vis pre-existing institutions,such as developing a priority-based environmental
               ii
strategy, carrying out monitoring and evaluation o f its current programs, and developing a
suitable financial management system, among others. In addition, there are a number of key
functions o f MINAM that have yet to be defined, including: (i)the role o f MINAM in the
environmental licensing process and        in the EIAs review process for large infrastructure/
investment projects (previously in charge o f sectoral environmental agencies); (ii)the role and
scope o f OEFA in environmental enforcement in light o f the existence o f other enforcement
agencies such as the Regulatory Agency for Mining and Energy (OSINERGMIN) and the agency
in charge of supervising and enforcing forestry concessions (OSINFOR); (iii)its roles and
functions vis Lr vis sectoral environmental offices, as well as regional and local governments; and
(iv) the core responsibilities which MINAMwould absorb from DIGESA.

26.     The structure of the Ministry of Environment(which is under development) consists
o f two vice ministries. The Vice-ministryfor Environmental Management would be in charge o f
environmental policies and regulations, promotion of environmental education, research and
innovation and addressing key issues related to environmental quality (including setting
environmental quality standards and maximum permissible emission levels). The Vice-ministry
for Strategic Development of Natural Resources would be responsible for biodiversity
conservation, climate change, soils and zoning, and promoting sustainability o f natural resources.
In addition, MINAM would absorb three decentralized autonomous agencies: (i)National
Service o f Meteorology and Hydrology (SENAMHI); (ii)the Peruvian Geophysical Institute
(IGP); and (iii)the Peruvian Amazon ResearchInstitute (IIAP). Annex 4 illustrates the proposed
structure o f MINAM.

Actions supportedby ENVDPL 1

27.     Based on the afore-mentioned challenges, the proposed ENVDPL would seek to
strengthen the legal and institutionalframework for environmental management, through
the creation of Peru's Ministry of Environment and its line agencies. The creation o f MINAM
would establish its organization and key functions and would serve to define core areas o f
environmental management such as: (i)environmental licensing and the review process o f EIAs


                                                 11

for large projects; (ii)environmental enforcement; (iii)development and compliance with
Environmental Quality Standards (ECAs) and Maximum Permissible Emission Levels (LMPs);
and (iv) its overarching coordinating role with key sectors and regions on environmental issues.
Likewisethe creation of MINAMwould define its role inenvironmental policy-setting.

Actions to be supported by subsequent operations

28.      There is a need to clarify the roles and responsibilities of key agencies in the
environmental licensing process and in the evaluation and approval of EIAs for large and
complex projects that could potentially impact the environment. Consequently there i s a
commitment to the implementation o f the regulation for applying the Law on the National
Environmental Impact Assessment System which would clarify the roles, define environmental
risk categories for projects, and promote Strategic Environmental Assessments among others.
The regulation would also contribute to definingthe key tasks in the licensing procedures to be
carried out by MINAM and key agencies. Likewise, the implementation o f a post-licensing
monitoring system would be promoted in order to ascertain whether commitments made during
the EIA stage have been upheld, and the promotion o f transparency, accountability and public
participation inthe environmental licensing system i s ensured.

A.2: STRENGTHENINGTHE INSTITUTIONALCAPACITY FOR BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION

29.      Peru is     considered a "mega-diverse'' country with nearly 10 percent of the world's
species o f flora, 2,000 species o f fish, 1,736 species o f birds, 332 species of amphibians (ranking
third in diversity of this group), 460 species of mammals (third in ranking) and 365 species of
reptiles (fifth in ranking). It i s also one o f the most important countries interms of the number o f
endemic specie^.'^ Additionally, the conservation o f natural resources and protected areas allows
Peru to generate global benefits in terms o f use o f biodiversity, watershed management, and
carbon sequestration, in addition to the already known benefits associated with biological and
genetic resources.

30.      The creation of the National System for Natural Protected Areas (Sistema Nacional
de Areas Naturales Protegidaspor el Estado, SINANPE) in 1990 was an important milestone
for biodiversity conservation. The SINANPE now covers over 19 million ha or 14.80 percent
o f the national territory. O f the total o f 60 protected areas at the national level, only 30 have an
already approved management plan, and in 8 more such plans are being prepared, covering
almost 52 percent o f all protected areas.

31.      A key development in national protected area (NPA) management has been the
creation of the National Fund for Natural Protected Areas (PROFONANPE)in 1992 as an
autonomous trust fund aimed at providing stable long-term financing for the conservation o f the
country's biological diversity. Since its establishment, PROFONANPE has contributed financial
and administrative support to the government's management o f SINANPE, thus supporting
INFENA's efforts In2008, the total amount or resources allocated to SINANPE has been inthe
order o f US$14.2 million o f which: (i)close to US$11.2 million came from PROFONANPEI4;


l3 At least 6,288 species are endemic to Peru, of which 5,528 are flora and 760 are fauna.
l 4Since 1998 PROFONANPE's investments in the SINANPE have been inthe order of US$51.6 million.

                                                          12

(ii)US$0.9millioncamefrom INRENA'sordinary resources;(iii)US$1.9millioncamefrom
directly collected resources (Le,, park entry fees); and (iv) US$0.2 million came from various
other sources.

32.     A financial gap analysis for the SINANPE, carried out for the 2005-2014 period,
concluded that the annual average financing gap (in a low case scenario) amounts to
approximately US$24 million, which would make it possible to finance NPA staff salaries,
other basic operational costs, and maintenance. The high case scenario o f about US$41.8 million
would help cover expenses associated with staff salaries, operational costs, strategic plans,
natural resource management plans, communication strategies, basic equipment, infrastructure,
and maintenance. A sustainable financing strategy for the SINANPE under preparation has
already identified potential sources for additional financing which include: (i)private sector
engagement in NPA management and financing; (ii)further promotion o f tourism inNPAs; (iii)
payment for environmental services; (iv) carbon sequestration through avoided deforestation
schemes; and (iv) bio-prospection, among others.

33.     Inspite of these conservation efforts, ongoing illegal logging, agricultural expansion,
extractive industries (notably            mining and hydrocarbons),              over-fishing, highway
construction, and the introduction of invasive species continue to degrade and threaten
Peru's critical ecosystems and globally significant biodiversity. Many critical ecosystems
(coastal regions and islands, grasslands, dry-forests, montane forests, etc.) fall outside the system
o f national NPAs and currently lack protection. Different sources identify deforestation as one o f
the leading drivers of biodiversity loss (particularly in the eastern flank o f the Andes) since it
deprives living species of their habitat^.'^ Currently, the intensive promotion of exploration for
mining and hydrocarbons in the highlands and the Peruvian Amazon basin (more than 60 new
exploration projects are being launched in both areas), matched with the ongoing illegal logging
and mining and lack o f enforcement inthe fisheries sector are strong indications o f further threats
to Peru's biodiversity and the sustainability o f its ecosystems.

34.     While progress has been made in the demarcation of protected areas, Peru faces the
challenge of institutional weakness for effectively managing and promoting conservation in
15 percent of its territory. Specifically, there i s a need to guarantee and promote the
conservation efforts by all stakeholders (including the private sector), since current legislation
does not assign clear responsibilities to different entities with mandates on biological
conservation, nor does it foster interagency coordination. Furthermore, application o f the existing
body o f regulations and policies i s weak and there i s limited capacity to properly manage
biodiversity at the regional and local levels. In addition, given the recent boom o f mining and
hydrocarbon concessions (particularly in the Amazon basin) there i s a strong need to develop
specific guidelines for the way extractive industries should be conducted in NPAs and buffer
zones.

Government's Program

35.     The GoP has taken on the challenge of addressing the institutional weaknesses in
natural protected area management and biodiversity conservation by establishing an


l5Conservation International, WWF, J. Elgegren (2006), D. Lee (2005, World Bank 2000


                                                      13

independent agency: the National Service for Protected Areas (SERNANP). SERNANP
would incorporate the functions o f the INRENA's Office for Protected Areas (Intendencia de
Areas Naturales Protegidas) under the Ministry o f Agriculture. Its creation will enhance its
presence within the institutional framework o f the country since it will be an institution with a
higher degree o f autonomy, better equipped, and managing a larger budget than its predecessor.
Under the new scheme, PROFONANPE is expected to continue funding the operational costs o f
SINANPE and complementing SERNANP's                      efforts with professional,      technical    and
administrative support.

36.     The government is            also undertaking numerous actions aimed at further
strengthening the conservation efforts of the country's protected areas. A key strategy
includes the development o f a program for NPA managers, who would substitute the current park
rangers. A NPA manager would be trained and have decision powers over hisher NPA, fund
raising and fund management capacities.

37.     Inaddition, SERNANP would be implementing inthe near future the following actions:
(i)enhancegreaterinvolvementofregionalgovernmentsinfinancingthemanagementofPASin
order to increase the conservation area for key ecosystems (and biodiversity hotspots) which are
currently unattendedI6; (ii)establish the National Reserve System o f Islands, Islets and Guano
Capes, given the current small proportion o f this critical ecosystem under protection and
conservation; and (iii)support the elaboration o f technical guidelines that would direct and
mainstream environmental concerns in the development o f extractive industries activities in PAS
and its buffer zones, in order to address the sudden expansion o f mining and hydrocarbon
concessions inthe Amazon basin.

Actions supported by ENVDPL 1

38.     The prior action under the proposed DPL will entail the approval of the regulation
establishing the key functions o f the new National Service o f Natural Protected Areas
(SERNANP). This regulation would provide the overarching institutional and policy framework
for biodiversity conservation and protected areas management, including the technical guidelines
and financing mechanisms. The creation o f SERNANP would further articulate the principles for
establishing new conservation areas at the national level, and its linkage with regional and local
NPAs as well as the rules o f engagement for the private sector.

Actions to be supportedby subsequent operations

39.     Actions to be implemented by the follow up DPLs would include: (i)the approval o f the
Action Plan for NPAs (Plan Director) that would provide the overarching framework and
strategy for the management o f the National System o f PASand would guide the conservation
efforts o f SERNANP and key stakeholders. Furthermore, given the importance o f increasing
resources to enhance the overall management o f NPAs, the identified triggers for the ENVDPL 2
include: (i)the approval by MINAM o f the Sustainable Financial Strategy o f Natural Protected
Areas (NPAs) System (currently in draft form); and (ii)the identification and approval o f


16These efforts would be supportedthroughthe implementationof the proposed-GEF-NationalSystemfor Protected
Areas Project (PRONANP), currently in preparation.

                                                    14

regulatory measures to promote private sector financing and the management o f NPAs. The
indicative medium-term actions for ENVDPL 3 would involve the implementation o f the
Sustainable Financial Strategy o f Natural Protected Areas System which would help to increase
financing to SINANPE, and the implementationo f incentives for private sector financing and the
management o f NPAs. It is expected that as an outcome for the end o f the program that at least
US$2 million per year would be raised for the SINANPE from various sources. Additional
resources would in turn support increasing qualified staff in NPAs with better equipment and
facilities to engage inconservation activities.

A.3: ENHANCING     POLLUTION MONITORING ENFORCEMENT
                                               AND                  CAPACITY

40.      The approval o f environmental quality standards (ECAs) and the establishment o f
maximum permissible emission levels (LMPs), particularly for air and water, are critical for
ensuring compliance with environmental regulations. Additionally, it i s important that
monitoring systems for air and water quality be consistent in their monitoring protocol. In Peru,
there are several air quality monitoring networks, which include DIGESA, the Lima Urban Rapid
Bus Transit System (COSAC), the National Service of Meteorology and Hydrology (SENHAMI)
which operate separately and monitor different parameters. The monitoring data from these
existing networks would be greatly enhancedby ensuring consistency inthe monitoring protocols
(what is being monitored, how is it being monitored, frequency o f monitoring, reporting, etc.)
across the different networks. Furthermore, reforms relating to transparency and public disclosure
o f monitoring data are needed to ensure that the information i s made available to the public and
decision makers in real time. The availability o f accurate, consistent, and regularly reported data
would consequently allow OEFA to properly undertake enforcement activities, identify mobile
and stationary sources o f emissions that exceed established LMPs, and implement sanctions and
strategies to improve urban air quality.

41.      In addition, given the severity of certain pollutants in Peruvian cities (Le., PMlo
concentrations in Lima, SO2 and Pb concentrations in La Oroya, etc.), there is the need to
implement pollution contingency plans that would systematically cut the emissions from key
sources when parameters greatly exceed permissible levels. Thus, the overall goal o f the DPL
series would be to strengthen the framework for environmental quality standards (ECAs) for
water and air emission levels and environmental monitoring. Despite the important reductions in
child mortality from diarrheal illnesses that Peru has achieved, diarrheal prevalence in both
adults and children remains high. Poor households are most severely affected, because the
combination o f relatively low income and education and lack o f access to basic services result in
a very high risk of diarrheal illness.

Government's Program

42.      The GoP has begun to take concrete steps towards improving pollution monitoring
and boosting enforcement capacity through the approval of environmental standards. This
has included the approval o f air quality standards for PM2.5 and maximum permissible levels
(LMPs) for industrial activities (such as paper, cement and industrial boilers), as well as for
mobile sources (such as motorcycles and heavy duty natural gas vehicles). Both ECAs and LMPs
have also been approved for soils. Likewise, initiatives in Peru, such as the Bank's Water and



                                                15

Sanitation Program (WSP) are working to promote and institutionalize handwashing among low-
income families through public-private partnerships. In addition, two specific DPLs led by the
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) are addressing water resource management and water
supply and sanitation. What remains critical is the establishment o f water quality standards for
drinking water, related public disclosure measures, and certification o f water quality laboratories.
With regardto water quality, GoP will support the periodic monitoring o f potable water quality,
with the data published quarterly on the websites of MINAMDIGESA, and the design and
implementation o f an Action Plan to improve laboratory accreditation and dissemination o f water
quality monitoring protocols."

Actions supportedby ENVDPL I

43.     The prior action under the proposed DPL would support the approval of the decree
establishing the ECAs and LMPs for air and water emissions. Having clear environmental quality
standards and emission levels i s an important step towards strengthening air and water quality
monitoring and environmental enforcement systems.

Actions to be supportedby subsequent operations

44.     The proposed triggers for ENVDPL 2 include: (i) approval o f a protocol to harmonize
                                                                    the
the integration of different air quality monitoring networks in metropolitan Lima (SENAMHI,
DIGESA, and COSAC); (ii)publication and dissemination o f daily air quality monitoring data
(in real-time); and (iii)the development of air quality contingency plans for Peru's five most
polluted cities. While a single trigger for this section would be desirable, the proposed actions are
interrelated and there i s clear commitment by MINAM and DIGESA to ensure their fulfillment.
The proposed indicative medium-termaction would support the implementation of contingency
plans based on the results from the air quality monitoring networks (e.g., industrial contingency
plans that would limit production; banning use o f part o f the vehicle fleet in peek hours/days;
sanctioning polluters that exceed emission standards) for the five most polluted cities in Peru
(Lima, La Oroya, Chimbote, Arequipa, and 110). In addition, it is expected that OEFA be able to
audit and fine polluters exceeding emissions standards.


B. MAINSTREAMING PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN KEY
SECTORS

B.l MINING

45.     Peru is the world's largest producer of silver, third largest producer of zinc, fourth
largest producer of lead, third largest copper producer, and the fifth largest producer of
gold. The mining industry is an important pillar o f the economy, accounting for 61.7 percent of
all Peru's exports and 6 percent o f Gross Domestic Product in 2007.18 However, the ongoing
contamination from past mining and smelting operations (mining environmental legacies,


  These actions would be supported through a number of initiatives, including a TAL (in preparation) for Water
ResourceManagement.
18Sociedad Nacional de Mineria, Petroleoy Energia del Peru. Reporte EstadisticoMinero-Energetic0 Segundo
Semestre 2007. www.snmpe.org.pe


                                                      16

MELs), scattered over vast tracts of the Peruvian territory, pose a serious health problem and are
a major social irritant in local communities. Poor tailings containment and inadequate methods
for disposing the large volumes o f hazardous materials and pollutants involved in mining
operations have already led to widespread seepage, acid drainage, and water pollution, as well as
other negative impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems. MELs are known to cause and/or
perpetrate certain social and economic impacts including: (i)the loss or damage to productive
land; (ii)the loss or degradation o f groundwater; (iii)the pollution o f surface water through
acidity, sediments or salts; (iv) degraded livelihoods that are dependent on aquatic ecosystems
which have been affected by leached pollution and contaminated sediments; (v) changes in river
regimes; (vi) air pollution from particulate matter and/or toxic gases; (vii) safety risks of falls
into abandoned shafts and pits; (viii) erosion and landslides; (ix) costs o f treating health
problems; and (x) displacement.

46.      Although mineral resources have been extracted for centuries, it was only in the
early 1990s that the GoP took the first steps to address the environmental and social
impacts of the mining sector. In this context, effluents and materials generated by mining
activities were not adequately disposed o f and generated significant impacts on ecosystems and
public health. The negative effects o f mining are still a matter o f concern, as indicated by well-
documented evidence. For example, a study carried out by the Ministry of Health in several
locations in Trujillo found that, because o f water pollution from mining and industrial activities,
23.5 percent o f the sampled population had cadmium blood levels that exceeded international
standards (DIGESA, 2001). Likewise, the growth o f the mining sector in the 20fhcentury led to
the creation o f smelters at 110 and at La Oroya. Over time, these smelters have contributed to
severe air and water pollution. A 2005 analysis conducted in La Oroya by St. Louis University's
School o f Public Health confirmed that lead pollution in La Oroya (a town o f 30,000 inhabitants
in central Peru where Doe Run's smelter is located) is seriously affecting the health o f its
population." The study revealed that about 97 percent o f children from six months to six years o f
age have lead concentrations in the blood (BLL) o f above 10 ug/dl (the permissible level
established by the World Health Organization). Additionally, about 72 percent o f the children
have BLL o f 20-44 ug/dl and 9 percent in the range o f 45-69 ug/dl (requiring urgent medical
attention).

47.     In addition, most of the conditions caused by environmental legacies represent a
considerable cost to the government which, accordingto Law No. 28271, is responsiblefor
cleaning up and rehabilitating abandoned (orphan) mining sites and their legacies. The
public has gradually become aware o f the risks and potential impacts o f legacies and i s
increasingly demanding action. Furthermore, mining and smelting environmental legacies are
now a key factor in growing community opposition to current and future mining activities, and
have been recognized as a potential source o f conflict by the MEM. It is clear that unattended
mining legacies (whether orphan sites, or those with identifiable concessions), which by law are
obliged to ensure its proper remediation, affect the overall perception o f the mining industry.

48.     Although MELs impacts have been well known, it was not until the second half of
the 1990's that the government attempted to categorize, prioritize, appraise and map them

19St. Louis University. EnvironmentalContaminationin La Oroya, Peru, and its HealthEffects in Community
Residents. St. Louis University Schoolof Public Health. 2005.
                               -



                                                     17

under the Environmental Legacies Elimination Project (Pruyecto de Eliminacidn de Pasivos
Ambientales-EPA). In 2003, the EPA project resulted in a preliminary inventory o f 610 MELs
and reported that nearly 72 percent o f them involve legitimate mining rights (Le., an identifiable
concessiodowner), whereas 28 percent have neither right nor identifiable owners (orphan).
According to a study carried out by the National Environmental Fund (FONAM) in 2006, the
inventory comprised 850 MELs, but was considered to be invalid by experts due to a
questionable MEL assessmentmethodology.

49.     Given the importance of the mining sector in Peru, the GoP has committed
resources to MEL remediation. For instance, FONAM supports MEM's efforts in MELs
remediation with a budget o f 22 million soles. The state company Activos Mineros was created to
support GoP's efforts in environmental remediation o f state MELs. In recent years, additional
efforts have been undertaken to support MELs identification and remediation such as the
PERCAN (Peru-Canada Cooperation Program), which has developed a methodology to assess
priority MELs in key watersheds, thus contributing to the updating o f a MEL inventory built on
environmental and health impacts. In addition, also recognized i s the need to develop a
systematized database o f MELs to help identify priority MELs, hence improving the actions
towards remediation.

50.     The two core instruments for environmental management in the mining sector
include: (i) the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and, (ii) the Environmental
Management and Adaptation Plans (PAMA-Programas de Adecuacidn y Maneju
Ambiental). The former is used to assess the potential impact o f a new mining project, whereas
the latter has been used to ensure environmental compliance by active mining operations. The
EIA is a mandatory management planning tool for the evaluation of the potential impact to the
environment and the well-being o f communities, local cultures, society and local economic
activities that would result from the different phases o f a proposed mining activity. However, the
procedures for EIAs in Peru have a number o f shortcomings which dilute their overall
effectiveness as an environmental management tool. Prior review o f terms o f reference for EIAs,
as part o f the scoping process, for instance, i s not a requirement for the EIAs o f medium or large
operations. Likewise the manuals to prepare EIAs are generic (can be used for a small aggregate
mine or for a large copper operation) and are not legally binding. Therefore, the overall
preparation o f an EIA can be weak and inefficient. In addition, there are a number o f
shortcomings in the preparation, review and approval process that need to be addressed in order
to improve the overall quality o f the EIAs process and strengthen the overall licensing
framework.

5 1.    Furthermore, the EIA process requires a systematic and complementary approach
that includes the social dimension as part of the environmental management system.
However, the law that created the National Environmental Impact Evaluation System fails to
                                                                                                         ~
refer explicitly to social aspects or ideas for regulation or impact prevention. Consequently, the
indirect and accumulated impacts on the socio-economic situation, demographics, public health,
social differentiation and structure, lifestyles and culture have been barely discussed. More
recently, however, the decree-law o f "Previous Commitment" (Compromiso Previo) has
established further requirements to address social issues in EIA, and has also placed higher
standards for the process o f consultation with the local communities. Social dimensions have


                                                   18

recently become widely recognized as a crucial element o f the impact assessment exercise in
Peru.

52.     The social dimension in Peru's mining sector is vast and complex. Current challenges
include: (i)the inadequate inclusion of social information in the EIA; (ii)    the way consultation
processes are being carried out; (iii)the industry's approach to the compensation o f affected
communities; (iv) the lack o f adequate communication between stakeholders; (v) the way
resettlement plans are being implemented; and (vi) the social monitoring o f the sector, and above
all vii) the role and presence o f Government within the sector. Following one o f the
recommendations in the Analytical Advisory Activity (AAA) on the Environmental and Social
Dimensions o f the Mining Sector, the GoP created the Office o f Social Affairs in MEM. The
objectives and functioning o f this office have evolved since its creation and it i s currently
increasing its positioning within the ministry, including not only the mining sector, but the
hydrocarbon and energy sectors as well.

Government's Program

53.     To strengthen the environmental governance of the mining sector, the government
has undertaken measures to address a number of shortcomings in the preparation, review
and approvalprocess to improvethe overall quality of the EIAs process and strengthenthe
overall licensingframework. These include the approval o f a norm that would: (i)redesignthe
manuals for preparing EIAs for mining operations, clarifying and distinguishing specific
requirements for different types and sizes of mining enterprise; (ii)make the manual for
preparing EIAs for mining operations legally binding; (iii)   require a prior review for the TORS
o f EIA for large scale/complex mining operations; and (iv) support the adoption o f a digital
licensing system, making the environmental licensing process more transparent and efficient.

54.     In addition, specific actions regarding MELs would include the approval of the
methodology developed with the support o f PERCAN to update MELs inventory and assess
priority sites per watershed. The methodology would use health, environmental, economic, and
aggregate impact criteria. In order to address social issues, the approval o f the management plan
and action plan o f the Office o f Social Affairs i s another critical step to be taken, as they will
contribute to the attainment of sustainable local or regional development plans for affected
communities.

Actions supportedby ENVDPL 1

55.     The two prior actions for the mining sector would focus on: (i)      approval o f Legislative
Decree (No. 1042), which modifies the MEL's Law (No. 28271) and puts the onus for
remediation on private holders o f MELs even after a mining title/concession has expired. An
amendment to the MELs law also prohibits new mining concessions to be granted to companies
that have not remediated their MELs. Until now a significant percentage o f "orphan" MELs are
not being addressed due to legal loopholes like this one, and consequently this measure
demonstrates a robust commitment by GoP to minimize future MELs by private sector
companies; and (ii)the approval o f the regulation defining public and community participation
during the concession, exploration, exploitation, execution and closing o f the mining process.
Environmental monitoring carried out by local communities i s one o f the most effective ways to

                                                19

boost ownership and reduce mistrust among the stakeholders. This measure would also
contribute to strengthening accountability and in areas with a limited government presence.

Actions to be supportedby subsequent operations

56.       The triggers in subsequent operations would support: (i)the development and
implementation o f an updated and systematized MELs inventory; (ii)the development o f a
national strategy for remediation o f priority MELs (using technical, environmental economic and
public health criteria)*';         and (iii)the continued promotion o f environmental participatory
monitoring for at least 40 mining sites. The indicative midterm actions would support the
development o f technical guidelines and indicators for adequate MELs remediation and the
approval o f priority projects for MELs remediation (following the national strategy and specific
guidelines for sound MEL remediation). Likewise, it i s expected that MEM would monitor and
register the level o f local participation in environmental issues linked to the mining activity
cycle. The program will not support any physical investmentsinMELremediation.

B.2 URBANTRANSPORT

57.       Urban air pollution is one of the most widespread and serious problems in Peru's
cities and is responsible for an estimated3,900 prematuredeaths per year.2' The problem o f
air pollution is most critical in the country's industrial corridors, such as Lima-Callao, which
bears almost 75 percent o f the estimated cost o f associated health impacts. Pollutant
concentrations in parts o f Lima are higher than in other Latin American cities with severe air
pollution, such as Mexico City and Santiago, and are also considerably higher than in cities
outside the region, including Los Angeles, Tokyo and Rome, which have successfully reduced
their ambient concentrations of air pollutants, despite having larger industrial and transportation
sectors (see Figure 2).
        i                  Figure 2: Yearly Concentrations of PMlO (pg/m3) in Selected Cities

                                                   _        _ _______  ~           -
                           ~ ~ - ~ - - _ ^ _ -
                     1001 j

                      80

                      60

                      40

                      20

                       0



         Source: Larsen and Strukova (2006)

20It is expectedthat the process for the remediation of priority MELs may begin after an updatedMEL inventory
that identifies the most critical and priority MELs, and through a national strategy that guides GoP in the processof
sound remediation.The updated inventory would allow MEM to rank and allocate resources and efforts to the
remediationof public and orphan MELs that pose the greatest risks to health, ecosystems.
21In addition to air pollution in urban areas, indoor air pollution is a serious health issue in poor rural communities in
Perupredominantlyaffecting women and children, who spend more time in closed areas with high concentrationsof
pollutantsassociated with the use of solid fuels.

                                                           20

58.     In 2001, regulations for National Environmental Standards for Air Quality were
issued covering sulfur dioxide (SOz), particulate matter (PMlo), carbon monoxide (CO),
nitrogen dioxide (NO*) and ozone (03). To establish these standards, Technical Committees
(Grupos de Estudio TkcnicoAmbiental de la Calidaddel Aire - GESTAs) were created. GESTAs
were responsible for formulating action plans to improve air quality in Arequipa, Chiclayo,
Chimbote, Cusco, Huancayo, Iquitos, La Oroya, Lima-Callao, Pisco, Piura, Trujillo and Cerro de
Pasco. Until recently each sector (transport, energy, etc.) prepared proposed Maximum
Permissible Levels (LMPs) and environmental quality standards (ECA), which were then
submitted for inter-sectoral review and final approval by the then environmental authority
CONAM. The Ministry o f Environment i s now in charge o f reviewing, endorsing and sending
the LMPs and ECAs for final approval by the executive branch. Compliance with LMPs and
ECAs has been the responsibility o f each sector, but is expected to be enforced by the OEFA
once it becomes operational.

Government's Program

59.     The Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM)has determinedthat the sulfur contentof
diesel fuel in Peru should be reduced from today's 5,000-10,000 parts per million (ppm
equivalent to 0.5- 1 percent) to 50 ppm (equivalent to 0.005 percent) by the beginning of
2010. Given the serious health implications from "dirty" diesel combustion and costs associated
with the new clean diesel vehicles imported into Peru MEMpassed a decree in March 2006, and
thereafter Congress approved Law 28694 to regulate the sulfur content o f diesel fuel. The law
currently allows for more than 5,000 ppm o f sulfur indiesel fuel, but mandates that diesel 1 (used
for industrial purposes) and diesel 2 (used for auto engines)22which in 2007 sulfur levels be
reduced to 50 ppm by 2010. Both Petroperu and Repsol have begun the process o f retrofitting
their refineries to produce "clean" diesel. However, it is unlikely that Petroperu will meet the
2010 deadline given the lengthy procurement process involved in adjusting its refineries. Despite
this handicap, it would be desirable if cleaner diesel (less than 50ppm) were made available in a
large percentage o f gas stations in Peru's large cities by 2010. Thus, it i s important for GoP to
have a strategy in place in the eventuality that both refineries (La Pampilla and Talara) do not
meet this deadline.

60.     There have been recent efforts to launch an Inspection and Maintenance System
(IM) in Lima-Callao for the vehicle fleet. The process has been hindered by legal disputes
involving concession and operating rights betweenthe municipality of Lima, the municipality o f
Callao, the Ministry o f Transport and the private operator that was awarded the concession.
Parallel discussions on alternatives to harmonize standards between Lima's metropolitan region
and other regions are also underway. In August 2008, the Ministry o f Transport and
Communications (MTC) published regulation (No025) establishing the rules, control and
responsibilities for the IM program for Lima. This regulation also establishes the working
arrangements with Lidercon (the company that would implementthe IM system). M T C has also
specified that vehicles tested in plants outside o f Lima can circulate in the capital, thus giving
validity to inspection processes elsewhere in the country. Even though a number o f details still
need to be defined through regulations, M T C expects an increase in the installation o f new IM



22Diesel 2 had amounted to an estimated 26.4% o f the total nationalrefinery production.

                                                        21

plants in the country. As proven inmany cities worldwide (including Mexico City and Santiago),
an IM system could contributeto substantial air quality improvements.

61.      As world oil prices have increased, Peru has been gradually converting on a wide
scale to low-cost natural gas, a fossil fuel abundant in the country, to reduce the current
hydrocarbon deficit and the country's dependence on costly diesel and liquefied petroleum
gas imports. Within this scheme, the conversion o f gasoline vehicles to natural gas has been
quite successful.23 By the end of June 2008, more than 38,000 light duty vehicles in Peru's
capital, Lima, have converted their engines to natural gas and the Peruvian Natural Gas Vehicle
Association predicts that 20,000 more will make the switch.by the end o f the year.24 In June
2008, there were around 42 natural gas service stations in Lima, and it i s expected that by the end
o f the year there will be approximately 55 of these stations. The municipality i s also preparingto
introduce a fleet o f natural gas-powered buses for mass transit.2s Furthermore, the government
has also fixed the price o f natural gas at 4.30 soles, or about $1.50, per gallon, and i s allocating
credits to facilitate vehicle conversion.26 According to MEM, the demand for natural gas has
reached levels projected for 2011, so there has been coordination with the suppliers to increase
the current flow of natural gas from 290 mcfm (million cubic feet per minute) to 380 mcfm by
August 2009, with an estimated increase by the end o f 2009 o f 450 mcfm.

62.      Complementingthe inspectionand maintenancesystem, and natural gas conversion,
the government of Peru is also helping to improve the quality of the vehicular fleet by
scrapping older vehicles. The creation of a Temporary Regime for the Renovation of the
Automotive Fleet aims to scrap diesel vehicles older than 10 years, as these more polluting
vehicles will be gradually replaced with newer natural gas vehicles. For this, the MEM i s in the
process o f evaluating the introduction o f economic incentives equivalent to the market price of
diesel vehicles more than 10 years old.

Actions supportedby ENVDPL 1

63.      Within the framework of the ENVDPL 1, prior actions that would contribute to
improvement of urban air quality include: (i)the promotion of vehicle conversion from
gasoline to compressed natural gas (CNG) and establishment o f stations supplying natural gas.
This successful program, which has already converted over 38,000 vehicles to CNG, includes
verification mechanisms. CNG appears more favorable for new vehicles such as taxis, light duty
vehicles, large buses, and other heavy-duty vehicles; and (ii)establishing reductions of sulfur in
diesel to 50ppm by 2010. As discussed above, improving diesel quality has the potential to
directly influence the improvement o f air quality and associated health impacts o f the population.

Actions to be supportedby subsequent operations

64.      With local refineries probably unable to meet the 2010 deadline for producingclean
diesel (of 50 ppm sulfur content), a contingency plan and strategy will be developed and


23Vehicles conversions to natural gas with more sophisticatedequipment(as is mostly promoted in Lima) can reduce
emissions and meet emissions standards.
24http://www.peruviantimes.com/breath-of-fesh-air-autos-in-peruvian-capital-making-switch-to-natural-gas/
25ibid
2bibid

                                                        22

supported under ENVDPL 2. Inthis line, additional measures to be supported under ENVDPL 3
include enacting a regulation which would establish that at least thirty percent o f gas stations in
the largest urban centers supply clean diesel with low sulfur content (less than 50ppm) and
possibly introducing a temporary measure to allow a maximum sulfur content o f 2000 ppm in
diesel outside urban centers. Other measures promoted under the program would include the
continuation o f the conversion o f vehicles to natural gas program with a view to increasing the
CNG fleet to 60,000 by 2009 (ENVDPL 2) and to 80,000 by 2010 (ENVDPL 3) with at least 90
gas stations supplying natural gas to the vehicle fleet. Subsequent operations would also support
the implementation of the IMsystem according to a timetable based on license plate numbers in
Lima (ENVDPL 2), followed by an expansion o f the IM program in the Lima metropolitan
region and in three additional cities (Arequipa, Chiclayo and Trujillo) given their respective
growing vehicle fleets.

B.3 F~SHERIES

65.     Peru's fishing grounds are the richest in the world and anchoveta remains the
world's largest single stock fishery. Over 300 million metric tons (MT) of fish have been
harvested from Peruvian waters during the almost 50 years of commercial fishing. Since
1960, the average yearly catch has been 6.56 million MT. Duringthe seven years since the last El
NiAo in 1998, 1999 - 2006, the average yearly catch has been 8.65 million MT. Anchoveta alone
constituted over 75 percent o f total harvest since 1960, and currently represent approximately 10
percent o f the global annual marine catch. Peru accounts for one third o f global fishmeal
production and for one quarter o f fish oil production. The fisheries sector is a significant
contributor to the Peruvian economy, generating around 6 percent o f employment, and 1.1
percent o f GDP (2006). Even though the value has increased since 2000, the exports o f fishery
products have decreased as a proportion of total Peruvian exports, from 16.3 per cent in 2000 to
7.4 per cent in 2006. This reflects the overall boom in Peruvian exports in the last decade. (Peru
CEA 2006, IFF0 and WTO Trade Policy Review).

66.     The sustainability of Peru's fisheriesis critically threatened by the extreme resource
volatility caused by the periodic occurrence of El Niiio, which, in combination with huge
overcapacity and inadequate management, leads to periodic collapses of the fishery stock
and severe environmental impacts. The periodic overexploitation o f fisheries o f various
species, including anchoveta and hake, has been observed. This is posing extraordinary
challenges for the governance o f the fisheries sector. Economic inefficiencies are now strongly
impacting the sector, with vessels fishing for anchoveta currently active for less than two months
during the year (see Figure 3). Significant benefits to society that could accrue from the sector are
now lost due to these economic inefficiencies, which result in a loss o f profitability for the
operators in the sector, a consequent reduction inthe tax base for the government, and the loss o f
resource rents for society. The overcapacity in the anchoveta fisheries further imposes risks on
other fishing grounds and causes negative environmental externalities that affect diverse sectors
of society.




                                                 23

           Figure 3: Effective vessel storage capacity and fishing days, 1990 2007       -


                     I




                                         Storage cap.         +Fishingdays

    Source: C. Paredes and M. Gutierrez. La Industria Anchovetera Peruana: Costosy Beneficios. June 2008.

67.     There are numerous environmental and other challenges in the fisheries sector and
a range of additional issues need to be tackled to ensure the sustainability of Peru's
fisheries. Commercial anchoveta production i s responsible for significant environmental and
human health impacts related to water and air pollution. Discharge o f effluents from fishmeal
processing and from fishing vessels i s the major source o f pollution. The studies that underpin
the preparation of this DPL identify the following main challenges relating to: (i)ensuring the
environmental sustainability o f fish resources; (ii)improving and strengthening the governance
and management o f the sector; (iii)reducing the over-capacity o f the fishing sector, particularly
in anchoveta fisheries; (iv) improving the social and equity issues inthe industry and mitigating
the social costs of restructuring; and (v) increasing the added value of the sector, including
through the development o f a domestic market for direct consumption o f anchoveta, which
represents a potential protein source for segments o f society threatened by malnutrition.

68.     The anchoveta fleet consists of about 1247 vessels, half of which are made of steel
and half are wooden vessels. The steel fleet has a storage capacity ranging between 65 and over
421 cubic meters per vessel, while the wooden fleet has only between31.5 and 110 cubic meters
per vessel. The steel fleet shows a high degree of concentration, with 306 vessels owned by the
largest seven companies (representing 70 percent o f fleet and plant capacity), 37 vessels owned
by 4 medium size companies (representing 7 percent o f fleet and plant capacity), and 280 vessels
owned by small companies with no integration to mill and oil plants. The steel fleet i s more
efficient, more formalized and better integrated with the mill and oil plants. The wooden fleet
(also referred to as the Viking fleet) lacks integration with the fishmeal and oil plants and i s
considered less efficient.

69.     Social impacts in the fisheries sector. Employment in the anchoveta industry i s
estimated at around 11,000 workers for the steel fleet and around 9,000 workers for the wooden




                                                      24

fleet. It i s estimated that around 16 crew members work on average in each o f these vessels.27
The workers o f the wooden fleet do not benefit from the labor rights the steel fleet has. In
addition, the workers o f the wooden fleet are the most vulnerable to sector restructuring.28

70.      Based on recent analyses, the needed capacity reduction to achieve higher efficiency
and sustainability would be of approximately 50 percent of the fleet. Aiming at this                         I


sustainability goal, government officials consider that the reform that started with the vessel
quota system established by Legislative Decree No. 1084 will reduce the fleet by around 30
percent. With this latter estimate, the impact on the fleet workforce could be approximately 7,000
workers having to leave commercial fishing and moving to other activities within the sector,
transferring to other sectors, or taking early retirement. Currently, as a consequence o f the
regulation of total allowable catch, these workers already face an extremely short fishing season
o f only about 50 days per year in the central and northern coast and about 100 days in the
southern coast. Further analysis o f the social implications o f the reforms in the fisheries sector
can be found in Section V1.A and Annex 6 below.

Government's Program

71.      The government of Peru has begun to undertake numerous actions to address the
overcapacity of the fishing fleet, as well as the related social issues in the fisheries sector.
The GoP has already approved a regulation relating to a freeze in the size o f the fishing fleet;
including the wooden fleet. Within the larger government program are actions that include: (i)
expanding vessel quotas for other fish resources, with particular focus on the pelagic fleet
(fishing for mackerel and jack mackerel); (ii)developing a "communications" strategy for the
PRODUCE to support implementation o f key sector reforms; (iii)                      promoting the direct human
consumption o f anchoveta29; (iv) assessing the advisability o f supporting a reduction o f the
fleet's over-capacity through a "decommissioning scheme"30; (v) continuing the enforcement o f
the freeze in the size o f the fishing fleet; (vi) inspecting the physical capacity o f each vessels
storage capacity o f the existing anchoveta fleet and ultimately o f the whole fishing fleet; and (vii)
undertaking a study to assess whether the social actions under the quotas law are effective in
mitigating the social impacts o f workers being displaced.

Actions supported by ENVDPL 1

72.      The proposed ENVDPLwill seek to support an overall reduction of the overcapacity
of anchoveta fleet and the adoption of measures to mitigate the associated social impacts of
fleet reduction. Therefore, it would support activities related to the regulation o f a rational


212008 Bernales, Antonio. "Estudio de linea base sobre la repercusionsocial de la reforma de la flota pesquerade
anchoveta en el Peru'. Futuro Sostenible.
28The Poverty and Social Impact Section below, as well as Annex 6, further analyze the potential impacts to the
workers within the fisheries sector.
29Anchovetarepresentsa valuablepotential protein source, particularly for the segments of the population
threatened by malnutrition. Developmentof a bigger domestic market for direct consumptionof anchovetawould
thereforehavenutritional benefitsand increasethe added value of the sector.
30The decommissioningscheme would provide the framework whereby governmentwould purchasesvessels,
permits, licenses and other entitlementsfrom participants in the fishing sector, particularly from companies (or
private owners) which have grounded vessels due to inefficiencies,thereby helping to curb overcapacity.

                                                        25

exploitation o f anchoveta and avoidance o f overfishing, which has clearly been one o f the key
factors contributing to the periodic collapses o f stock. The proposed prior action under the
current DPL includes the recent adoption o f the Legislative Decree No. 1084 regulating
anchoveta fishing      quotas by vessel, which includes social protection measures for displaced
workers. Both actions aim at improving the environmental and social governance o f the fisheries
sector. These measures are aligned with the government's progress in sectoral reforms.
Establishing vessels quotas in the anchoveta fleet would strengthen the reform process aimed at
reducing overcapacity.

73.      In addition, through Legislative Decree No. 1084, the DPL will support the
strengthening of the governance and social framework of the fisheries sector in order to
remediate the social impact o f fleet capacity reduction, in that it will provide mechanisms to
mitigate the downsizing o f the sector. The decree prohibits firing crew membersand allows only
for voluntary retirements and rotation of workers. The same law also creates a social
compensation fund (FONCOPES) that would impose obligatory contributions by ship owners in
an amount proportional to the individual quotas and the number o f workers per company.31 This
fund will provide financing to support early retirement for workers between 50 and 55 years of
age, economic incentives for shifting to new economic activities for workers leaving fishing
voluntarily, and a program for the creation o f micro enterprises, including training and technical
assistance. The fund will be financed exclusively by the private sector with'no financial costs to
the government. In addition, the law will impose a levy o f US$ 1.95 per metric ton of landed
anchoveta for a maximum o f ten years to support the financing o f the pension system. It i s
expected that these contributions will create a fund o f approximately US$100million.

Actions to be supported by subsequent operations

74.      The proposed trigger would support the adoption o f the regulation which would include
the required technical definitions for its implementation. Likewise, it would promote the
implementation o f funding for .FONCOPES and the pension fund. Furthermore, the program
would support the distribution o f quotas and enforcement o f the quota system, as well as
ensuringcontinuity inthe application of the pension fund.



             IV.       BANK SUPPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM

A. LINK TO THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

75.      On December 19th, 2006, the Board reviewed a new five year Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) with Peru for FY07-FYI1 (Report PE-37913, December 19th2006). The CPS lays
out a strategy to support the GoP to achieve its goals o f sustained annual growth over 5 percent
each year in 2007-2011; and poverty reduction o f between 1.5 and 1.8 points per year. Under the
CPS the Bank's program o f activities to support the GoP in reaching these objectives i s
organized around three pillars and six clusters, as follows:



3 'These amounts will be determined once the government issues the regulation for Decree-law 1048 which will
make FONCOPESoperational.


                                                     26

           Pillar (i)Economic Growth
           1. Maintaining macro stability and reducing vulnerabilities;
           2. Accelerating growth and widening its base;
           3. Making growth environmentally sustainable;

           Pillar (ii) Social Development
           4. Meeting Basic Needs;
           5. Promoting a new social contract ineducation, health and nutrition;
           Pillar (iii)Modernization o f the State
           6. Modernizing state institutions.

76.      Under cluster 3, the CPS recognizes the need to raise the profile o f environmental issues
in Peru, and includes a potential set of DPLs that will enhancepublic environmental investments
and strengthen the institutional framework. These environmental DPLs contribute directly to
making growth environmentally sustainable (within pillar i)by supporting the environmental
management o f biodiversity conservation, enhancing control over air and water pollution,
improving the sustainability o f extractive industries (such as mining and hydrocarbons) and the
sustainable management o f fisheries.

77.      The CPS emphasizes that while environmental damages inPeru have an annual economic
cost o f 3.9 percent o f GDP and primarily affect the poor, both public and private environmental
expenditures amount to about a quarter o f a percent o f GDP, low by international standards. This
lack o f financial support aggravates the weak institutional capacity for environmental
management. Responding to environmental challenges will require establishing or strengthening
specialized agencies with clear responsibilities and adequate resources to address priorities.

78.      Under its Indicative Bank Lending Program, the CPS lays out two Environmental DPLs,
in FY08 and FY10, respectively. However, considering that this Program is a priority for Peru,
MEF requested that the Bank increase the ENV DPL series to a 3-phase programmatic operation.
The proposed set of DPLs contributes to promoting dialogue around environmental issues and
helps moving the environmental agenda higher up in the country's priorities. The proposed
program also contributes to achieving CPS                                    by: (i)supporting the increase o f
financing for protected areas, which enhances and rationalizes its management and area under
conservation; (ii)supporting the anchoveta vessel quota system, which rationalizes the fisheries
sector and addresses overcapacity; and, (iii)supporting activities that will improve fuel quality
and vehicle performance contributing to improvements in air quality and its associated health
impacts.

B. COLLABORATION WITH IMFAND OTHER DONORS

79.      The Bank has coordinated with the following external assistance agencies during project
preparation: the Andean Development Corporation (CAF); the Inter-American Development


              ~~           ~




32 CPS lays out six Clusters describing estimative outcomes for making Growth Environmentally Sustainable by the
end of the CPS period for: (a) biodiversity; (b) fisheries; (c) deforestation rate; and (d) health impacts from air
pollution.



                                                            27

Bank (IDB); and the UnitedNations Development Program (UNDP). Inparticular the Bank has
closely coordinated with the IDB in sharing documentation and through joint missions. In this
respect, the proposed operation i s designed to complement efforts led by three IDB DPL
operations on water resources management; water supply and sanitation; and sustainable energy
matrix (all currently under preparation). Based on World Bank -1DB discussions with the
government, it was agreed that the IDB would focus on issues pertaining water quality, supply
and sanitation, and on the promotion o f renewable energies. Likewise, in discussions with
government, it was agreed that CAF would focus on supporting the forestry sector through their
loan on Competitive and Sustainable Forestry Development. The World Bank and the IMF have
been engaged ina continuous dialogue on the World Bank's country partnership implementation,
and IMF has been consulted in the progress report to the CPS. The dialogue with IMF has
concentrated on the macroeconomic background, setting of triggers, risks, and estimation o f
fiscal implications o f Bank's operations and the current financial crisis and its potential impact to
Peru. In addition, the IMF has provided technical assistance in the areas o f tax policy and tax
administration reform, capital market development and government systems modernization.

C.RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER BANK OPERATIONS

80.     Activities under the Peru Environmental DPL supporting reforms in mining, biodiversity
conservation, air quality and other sectors are fully consistent with several World Bank Group
projects. These include projects in urban transport, protected areas management, and extractive
industries. Details o f these operations can be found in Annex 5. Activities supported by this DPL
will reinforce the sustainability of project results by promoting an adequate framework that
includes requiredsector policy reforms.

D. LESSONSLEARNED

81.     The proposed ENVDPL is the first DPL related to mainstreaming the environment inkey
sectors in Peru, but builds upon lessons from about five previous operations o f its type in the
Latin American and Caribbean Region. These include the (i)Brazil First Programmatic Reform
Loan for Environmental Sustainability (ii)Mexico Programmatic Environmental Structural
Adjustment Loan I(EnvSAL I)and the follow-up Second Programmatic Environmental DPL
(ENVDPL 2); (iii)Colombia Programmatic Development Policy Loan (SusDevDPL) and the
follow-up Second Programmatic DPL (SusDevDPL 11). Some o f the key lessons from these
environmental DPLs have included:

82.     The importance of a building a reform programon extensive analytical work, which
includes technical, institutional, and political economy analyses. In particular, identification
o f priorities based on both analytical work and perceptions; and good understanding o f the
institutional framework, including both informal and formal rules.

Results andfindings from a detailed 2005 Country Environmental Analysis serves as an
underlying basisfor the suggestedactions in theproposed ENVDPL programfor Peru. The CEA
included assessments of institutional needs and shortcomings of the national environmental
system in Peru.




                                                 28

83.     The importance of focusing on a select number of central actions, impacts and
results in the design of the Program. Previous operations such as the EnvSAL Ihad a large
number of prior actions that covered a broad range of development areas. Consequently,
implementation and supervision covered a wide range o f topics, presenting challenges interms o f
sufficient human and budgetary resources and constant dialogue between the Bank and GOM
throughout the period o f implementation.

Theproposed operation's design reflects this lesson, and includes a streamlined number ofprior
actions (limited toa), which  addresses the country's sectoralpriorities; and have a resulting
development impact.

84.     The importance of establishing specific, measurable, and relevant outcome
indicators. A relevant set o f monitorable and meaningful outcome indicators should be
established at the outset o f a program, along with clearly-defined baseline and target values to
monitor progress and evaluate outcomes. Some o f the indicators established for previous
environment DPL programs have been overly complex and ambitious.

The operation's design also reflects this lesson, by defining the baseline value of a core set of
outcome indicators as well as target values to measureprogress.

85.     Several o f these lessons are also echoed in the Bank's long history o f programmatic
lending in support o f reform in the social sectors in Peru, such as Programmatic Social Reform
Loan (PSRL) IV operation (2004), and the Results and Accountability (REACT) DPL (2007).
For example, the most important lesson learned from the PSRL IV was the need for a strong
focus on a limited number o f outcomes together with a clear set o f quantifiable program results
with their associated baselines. The proposed ENVDPL operation in Peru incorporates this
lesson in its design.

E.ANALYTICAL UNDERPINNINGS

86.     The Peru Environment DPL builds on two recently completed pieces of analytical work:
(i)TheEnvironmentalandSocialDimensionsoftheMiningSector inPeru;and(ii)anextensive
Country Environmental Analysis (CEA). Each o f these studies has provided critical inputs to the
government's strategy relating to key environmental issues inPeru.

87.     The recent CEA "Environmental Sustainability: A Key to Poverty Reduction in Peru"
identifies a number o f cost-effective policy interventions that could be adopted in the short and
medium term to support the GoP's attempts to address problems of inadequate water supply,
sanitation and hygiene; urban air pollution; natural disasters; lead exposure; indoor air pollution
etc. Many of the recommendations from the CEA were included in the government's planned
reform program for the environment sector, and find their way into the policy actions matrix (as
reflected inTable 4).




                                                 29

                 Table 4. ENV DPLProgram's Support o f Policy Options of the CEA


Institutional    EstablishEnvironmentalHealthAgency             The approval of the law creatinga new Ministry
reform           within the Ministry of Healthto regulate       of Environment(MINAM), as well as its key
                 environmental qualityparameters that affect    functions and structure are being supported by
                 health, including(i) emission of PM2.5, lead   ENVDPL 1. The newly created MINAM would
                 and toxic pollutants; (ii) fuel quality to     absorb the core responsibilities of DIGESA
                 tackle air quality; and (iii) water-quality    (relatingto environmentalhealth).
                 parameters such as bacteriologicalquality,
                 PersistentOrganic Pollutants (POPS),
                 Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) and
                 heavy metals.

                 Issueregulationsfor the Environmental          The passage o f Amendmentto the Law for
                 ImpactAssessment (EIA) Law.                    NationalSystem of EIA
                                                                  o ENVDPL 2 will support implementationof
                                                                   regulation associated with NationalEIA Law,
                                                                   definingMINAM's role in environmental
                                                                   evaluations and licensing.

                 Establisha planningprocessto align             MINAM's financial capacity would be
                 environmental expenditureswith priorities.     strengthenedin order to align its operations and
                                                                expenditures to priority environmentalissues.

Reduce         0 Establishnationalambient standards for         Approval of environmentalquality standards
health risks     PM2,5and PMloin priority urban areas and       (ECAs) and maximum permissibleemission levels
associated       strengthentechnology-specific emission         (LMPs)for air and water. Approval of LMPs for
with ambient     standards for PM and its precursors            fishmeal processingplants.
air pollution    (particularlysulfur and nitrogen oxides).        o ENVDPL 2 will supportthe approval ECAs
                                                                    for PM2.5; ECAs and LMPs for soils; LMPs
                                                                    for the paper and cement industriesand
                                                                    industrialboilers, as well as for motorcycles
                                                                    and heavy duty natural gas vehicles.

                 Implementa programto monitor air quality         o ENVDPL 2 will support ensuring consistency
                 to keeptrack of PMZ.5,   PMlo,and ozone in         in air quality monitoringprotocolsused by
                 priority urban areas.                              different networks; Publicationand
                                                                    dissemination of daily air quality monitoring
                                                                    data (in real-time).

                 Implement interventionsto control air          Approval of law establishingreductionof sulfur
                 pollutionthat includesreducingsulfur           in diesel to 50 ppm by 2010.
                 content in diesel to less than 500 ppm,          o ENVDPL 2 will supportthe implementationof
                 includingincreasingclean imports of diesel         a strategy and designof a contingency plan to
                 with low-sulfurcontent                             ensure a reduction in sulfur in diesel by 2010.

Reduce           Institutionalizea system of quotas for         Introduce vessel quotas for the Anchoveta Fleet
overcapacity     fishingfleet.
in fishery
sector

  88.      Another recent report "Wealth and Sustainability: the Environmental and Social
 Dimensions of the Mining Sector in Peru" analyzes the principal environmental and social
 problems associated with the mining sector, examining the technical aspects of environmental
  impacts and the use o f the income derived from mining. The aim o f this report was to provide the


                                                           30

   Government o f Peru with technical analysis and a framework for making choices that could help
   improve its capacity to address the environmental and social impacts o f mining operations. The
   recommendations from this study are also considered in the ENVDPL program for Peru (as
   reflected inTable 5).

                 Table 5. ENV DPL Program's Support of Mining Study Policy Options


Mining             Enhancingand updatingthe current                 Approval of methodology to update MELs
environmental      inventoryby identifying and prioritizing         inventoryand determine priority sites per
legacies           the most critical MELs (based on health          watershed
(MELs)             and risk criteria), determiningtheir              o ENVDPL 2 will support the establishment and
                   associatedremediationcosts, and their                  implementationo f an updatedand systematized
                   legalstatus, and filling other information             MEL inventory
                   gaps.
                   Based on this inventory and diagnosis, the       To prevent `orphan' sites, the DPL supports the
                   GoP's efforts should focus on `orphan'           passageof amendment to MEL Law, placing the
                   sites which pose a clear health, safety, or      responsibility for remediationon private holder
                   environmentalissue.                              (even after mining titlekoncession has expired).
                                                                     o ENVDPL 2 will support a decreeto ban the
                                                                          award of new mining concessions to companies
                                                                          that have not remediatedtheir MELs

                   Developinga strategy for addressingand            o ENVDPL 2 will support the approvalof a
                   remediatingthe most critical MELs                      national strategy and technical guidelines for
                   together with a monitoring program;                    sound remediationof MELs.

                                                                  ~~    ~~    ~~




Environmental      The EnvironmentalImpactAssessment                Redesign of EIA manuals for mining operations
licensing          (EIA) process could be strengthenedby            initiated in order to clarify and distinguish
                   following ways include(i)requiringthat           requirements based on the type and size of mining
                  the guide for the elaboration of EIA's            enterprise.
                  becomes binding by law; (ii)improving              o ENVDPL 2 will support the approvalof
                  and updatingthe contents of this guide;                 regulationsthat would: (i)make the EIA
                  (iii)preparingdetailedterms ofreference                 manual for mining operations legally binding;
                  (TORs) for the EIA of complex projects;                 (ii) require a prior review (by MEM) o f the
                  (iv) sharingthe responsibility of the                   TORs for the EIA of large scalekomplex
                   licensingprocess with other governmental               mining operations;and (iii) incorporatesocial
                  agencies; (v) integratingEIA with social                aspects in the EIA of mining activities.
                   imuact assessments etc.

Social conflicts  The MEM should continue expandingits              Developmentand approval of public consultation
                  role as a provider of information and             guidelines for mining operators (including
                  prepare guidelines for industry on how to         communication strategies and resettlement
                  address the most critical social issues.          processes).
                                                                     o ENVDPL 2 will support the implementationof
                                                                          a planto strengthen the Social Affairs office in
                                                                          MEM to better implement regulation and
                                                                          public consultationguidelines.

                  Crucial that local stakeholders build             Approval of regulationdefining public and
                  capacity to participatein the mining              communityparticipation requirements during the
                  project cycle, as well be able to negotiate       following mining processes:concession,
                  and engage in constructive relationswith          exploration, exploitation, execution, and closing.
                  mining oroiects


                                                         31

89.     Finally, part o f the basis for the analysis o f the ongoing reforms in the fisheries sector
(namely with regard to the quota system for the anchoveta fleet) was based on two studies, "La
Industria Anchovetera Peruana: Costosy Benefcios: UnAndisis de su Evolucibn Recientey de
10s Retos para el Futuro", and "Estudio de linea de base sobre la repercusibn social de la
reforma de la flota pesguera de anchoveta en el Perzi". The first one addresses the economic
conditions o f the industry, including costs and income o f the fleet and fishmeal plants, looking to
estimate the benefits (private, public, social, economic, ecological) from a reduction in capacity;
and the second study, a social study, estimates the baseline employment in the anchoveta fishery
sector, including an analysis o f changes in sources o f income, and other social indicators (like the
education level, and state o f health) to determine the impacts o f a fleet reduction on the labor
force and affected communities, and to identify strategies for alternative economic activities.



                                V.       THE PROPOSEDOPERATION

A. OPERATION DESCRIPTION

90.     This proposed Environmental Development Policy Loan (ENVDPL 1) for US$330
million to the GoP will be the first in a series o f three loans. The overarching objectives o f the
proposed Environmental DPL program aim to support the government's efforts to achieve the
following: (i)improve the efficiency and effectiveness o f environmental governance and
institutions in Peru; and (ii)mainstream sustainability principles in the development agenda o f
key sectors to improve the management o f the mining sector, improvements in air quality, and
enhance the fisheries sector. The ENVDPL is one o f the key pillars o f the 2006 Country
Partnership Strategy for Peru and o f the government's strategy to strengthen its sustainable
development policies, and will contribute to Peru's efforts towards the achievements of the
MillenniumDevelopment Goals (MDGs).~~

91.     This operation, under preparation for over a year, will be presented for Board approval in
February 2009 and an initial disbursementof $20 million i s expected upon effectiveness (by mid-
2009). The two subsequent ENVDPL loans for the environment sector (ENVDPL 2 and
ENVDPL 3 ) are currently planned for 2009 and 2010. All prior actions required for this DPL
have been fulfilled. The timing o f this DPL program i s opportune given Peru's economic growth,
the promising outlook for key sectors in which environmental issues are receiving government
attention, the recent creation o f a Ministry o f Environment, as well as the approval o f the Free
Trade Agreement with the USA that includes environmental aspects.




33The proposedENDPL would contribute to the attainmentof MDG's Goal 7 which seeks the attainmentof
environmental sustainability, and Target 9 which promotesprinciples of sustainable development in country policies
and programs.

                                                       32

I                          Box 1: Good PracticePrincipleson Conditionality
 Principle 1: Reinforce Ownership. The ENVDPL 1 is fully aligned with the government's General Law
 of the Environment. The creation of a new Ministry of Environment (MINAM) reinforces the
 government's commitment to environmental governance and in facing and addressing the country's
 environmental challenges. The operation also rests on a solid analytical foundation of studies that have
  benefited from close client engagement and wide stakeholder consultation, and have had a significant
  impact on the developmentof governmentpolicies.

 Principle 2: Agree up front with the government and other financial partners on a coordinated
 accountabilityframework. The proposed loan is based on a coherentframework of previous actions and
 expected outcomes that is based on the GoP's program. The Bank team and the GoP have prepared an
 operational policy matrix, agreeingon the indicative triggers for the preparationof the loan, prior actions
 for Board approvaland expected programoutcomes based on the government's program.

 Principle 3: Customize the accountability framework and modalities of Bank support to country
 circumstances. Bank support does not include any sensitive policy reforms; rather is fully aligned with
 the sustainabledevelopmentagenda laid out by the General Law of the Environment.

 Principle 4: Choose only actions critical for achieving results as conditions for disbursement The
 Bank's policy matrix requires 8 prior actions for the ENVDPL 1. The prior actions are focused on the
 developmentand passageof reformssupportingthe government's medium-termdevelopmentprogram.

 Principle 5: Conduct transparent progress reviews conducive to predictable and performance-based
 financial support. The proposed one-trancheoperation is timed to the country's budget cycle, with the
 timing agreed in discussions with MEF based on a review of the operation's prior actions. The policy
 matrix contains a limited number of outcome indicators, which will be assessedas part of the operation's
 implementationand are closely linked to the supportedpolicy actions.


 B. POLICY AREAS

 92.     The specific policy areas and actions that are supported by the Peru Environmental DPL
 series are outlined in the priority matrix found in Annex 2. These policy actions are aimed at
 strengthening institutional and environmental governance; mainstreaming principles o f
 sustainable development in key sectors including mining, fisheries, and those supporting
 improvedair quality.

 93.     Policy actions for environmental governance include the following:

         To strengthen the legal and institutionalframework for environmental management. The
         operation supports the approval o f the law creating, organizing, and establishing key
         functions of the Ministry o f Environment; and the implementation of the regulation of the
         law for the National System o f Environmental Impact Assessment, which will define the
         roles and responsibilities o f MINAM in the evaluation o f environmental impact
         assessments for large projects and key sectors.


     0   For biodiversity conservation, this operation will support the issuance o f supreme decrees
         which will approve a regulation establishing functions o f the National Service o f Natural
         Protected Areas (SERNANP).




                                                   3 3

       To strengthen the framework for environmental quality standards (ECAs) and maximum
       permissible emission levels (LMPs), this operation will support the issuance o f a series o f
       ECAs and LMPs for air and water. Likewise, it will support improved air quality
       monitoring in the Lima metropolitan region and the development o f air pollution
       contingency plans for selected cities.

94.    Policy actions to support the mainstreaming o f sustainable development in key economic
sectors inPeru include the following:

       This operation would support policy actions in the mining Sector, that would improve
       public participation, promote transparency and enhance the capacity to remediate mining
       environmental legacies (MELs) by: (i)placing the onus o f the remediation o f MELs on
       private owners even after their title and/or concession has expired, and inhibiting new
       mining concessions to companies that have not remediated their MELs; (ii)supporting a
       methodology to update the MELs inventory and assess priority sites; and (iii)   supporting
       the government's efforts to strengthen environmental and social governance inthis sector
       through the issuance o f a decree defining public and community participation during
       various stages o f the mining process.

       For the urban transport policies aimed at improving air quality, this operation supports
       actions in two areas: (i)improvingfuel quality, through the issuance o f a supreme decree
       to promote vehicle conversion to natural gas and establishing supply stations; andthrough
       the enactment o f a law to reduce the content o f sulfur in diesel by 2010; and (ii)
       improving vehicle performance through the implementation o f a vehicle inspection and
       maintenance system for the Lima metropolitan region.

   0   In the fisheries sector, this operation supports the government's program to reduce
       overcapacity in the anchoveta fleet and mitigate social impacts relating to displaced
       workers. This includes the regulation o f anchoveta fishing quotas per vessel, and the
       implementation o f the funding mechanism for FONCOPES and the pension fund for
       workers.


C. LOANAMOUNT AND TRANCHING

95. The proposed US$330million loanwill be made to the Republic of Peru. The proposed
US330 million loan will be made to the Republic of Peru. GoP has elected a Deferred
Drawdown Option (DDO) as the disbursement mode for this first operation in the series o f 3.
The loan is expected to have a fast disbursement of US$20 million upon effectiveness (by mid
2009).   The remaining US$310 million will be kept as a contingency fund which could be
withdrawn on one or several tranches unless the Borrower receives prior notification from the
Bank that a review o f the drawdown conditions (Le. adequate macroeconomic policy framework
and/or satisfactory program implementation) i s necessary.




                                               34

                            VI.      OPERATIONIMPLEMENTATION

A. POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACTS

96.     Peru faces high levels o f poverty and inequality. In 2004, just over half o f Peru's
population was poor and about 20 percent were extremely poor. Although regional comparisons
are difficult due to the use o f different poverty lines across countries, Peru's poverty levels are
below those o f Ecuador and Colombia, but above those o f Argentina and Brazil based on a
US$2/day poverty line. Inequality, measured by the Gini coefficient, stood at 0.43 -below the
Latin American average o f 0.52, but still highby international standards.

97.     Poverty i s significantly higher in rural compared to urban areas. In rural areas poverty
stands at 72 percent and extreme poverty at 40 percent; while in urban areas, the rates are 40
percent and 8 percent, respectively. Poverty i s also higher and more extreme inthe Sierra and the
Selva compared to the Costa.34Most o f the regional variation inpoverty rates can be attributed to
variation in household characteristics, and in access to basic services and road infrastructure,
rather than to geographical differences such as altitude and temperature. Inequality i s lower in
rural areas, especially inthe rural Costa, and highestinLima.

98.     Poverty has been slow to respond to the country's impressive economic growth in recent
years. After improvements during the 1990s, poverty increased inthe wake o f the 1998 economic
crisis, while extreme poverty remained stable. Since 2001, GoP's efforts have contributed to a
gradual but strong positive impact in reducing extreme poverty. However, progress in poverty
rate improvements has been slower inrural areas.

99.     The poor are disproportionately impacted by the costs o f environmental damage.
Distributive analysis o f environmental health impacts indicates that outdoor air pollution's
harmful effects in Lima-Callao are 75 percent higher for the poor than for the non-poor, even ina
conservative base-case scenario. The health impacts on the poor resulting from inadequate water
supply, sanitation and hygiene are nearly 3 times higher than on the non-poor. In relation to
income, the impacts are more than 10 times higher for the poor. Data are not available to estimate
the relative impacts of indoor air pollution on the poor vs. the non-poor; however, most of the
impacts occur among the poor because their use o f solid fuels i s far greater than by the non-poor.
The impacts on all environmental health categories -Le., urban air pollution, water, sanitation
and hygiene, and indoor air pollution per 1000 people- are nearly 20 percent higher for'the poor
that for the non-poor. Relative to income, the impacts on the poor are 4.5 times higher that on the
non-poor.

100.    The Peru ENVDPL programwill have a direct effect on poverty reduction. Policy reforms
in the energy and mining sectors, as well as those relating to environmental health will lead to
improvements in air and water quality; contribute towards decreases in morbidity and mortality
from diarrheal diseases, acute respiratory illnesses and other health risk, and reduce the economic
burdenfrom avoided health costs and improved productivity.


34Peru is commonly divided into three geographic regions:"Sierra" (mountains),"Selva" Cjungle), and "Costa"
(coast).


                                                      35

 101.    Social impacts and mitigatingmeasures. Most o f the activities supported by the Peru
ENVDPL are expected to have positive social impacts, particularly in reducing adverse impacts
in people's health. Examples include interventions in the mining sector relating to actions to be
undertaken to cleanup environmental legacies, enhanced community monitoring, the clean air
initiatives relating to the approval o f LMPs, and the improvement in fuel use.

 102.    In addition, the government's reform program in the fisheries sector includes provisions
for social protection for workers likely to be affected by the anchoveta fleet reduction. Some
experts consider that an ideal reduction o f the sector would be an estimated 50 percent of the
fleet in the medium and long term, while government officials consider that the reform that
started with the quota system established by Legislative Decree 1084 would reduce the fleet by
around 30 percent. Considering this latter estimate, the impact on the fleet workforce could be in
the order o f approximately 7,000 workers having to leave this type o f fisheries to take jobs in
other activities within the sector, move to other sectors, or take early retirement. It is important to
note, however, that for the most part many o f the jobs that would be lost are part-time in nature
since the core fishing activity does not take place year round. Currently, due to the quota system,
these workers already endure an extremely short fishing season o f only 50 days per year in the
central and northern coast and 100 days inthe southern coast.

103.    Among the social benefits imbeddedinLegislative Decree 1084 i s the ban on firing crew
members and allows only for voluntary retirements and rotation of workers. Likewise, is the
creation o f a social compensation fund (FONCOPES) that will impose obligatory                contribution^^^
to ship owners. This fund will provide financing (a salary package) to support early retirement
for workers between 50 and 55 years old; economic incentives for shifting to new economic
activities for voluntary worker attrition; and a program for the creation o f micro enterprises,
including training and technical assistance. The fund will be financed exclusively by the private
sector with no financial costs to the government.

104.    In addition to the contributions described above, the financing of a pension fund will be
supported by the imposition (through Legislative Decree No. 1084) o f a levy of USD 1.95 per
metric ton o f landed anchoveta for a maximum o f ten years. A more detailed description of the
overall social implications o f this operation i s inAnnex 6.

B. ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS

105.    The provisions of OP8.60 on Development Policy Lending apply to ENVDPL. The
policies and reforms supported by this operation are expected to have a positive effect on
the country's environment, by supporting improved environmental governance and
management. As the main objective o f this environmental DPL is to help the government
mainstream environmental concerns in a number o f key sectors (such as mining, fisheries,
energy), the design of the operations will help internalize environmental and social safeguards
issues at the macro level. Consequently, it i s expected that the policies supported under this




35The amount will be determinedin accordanceto the individual quotas and the number of workers per company.
These amounts will be determinedonce the governmentissues the regulation (Regfamento) for the decree-law 1084
which will include the functioning of FONCOPES.


                                                     36

operation are unlikely to cause significant negative effects, and will instead have positive effects
on Peru's environment, and other natural resources.

106.    The government's commitment to improved environmental governance and to the
ENVDPL Program is evidenced by the creation of a new Environment Ministry in May
2008, and the allocation of its operating budget (more than twice the yearly budget of
CONAM) as approved in August 2008. The government's efforts at strengthening
environmental governance through policy reforms are supported by this DPL operation. Positive
impacts on the environment are expected to derive from improved environmental management at
the national and local levels, in which the program places particular emphasis in assuring
improved transparency and accountability with respect to governmental oversight and decision-
making processes. The conservation o f biodiversity and natural protected areas in Peru will also
be enhanced through various reforms and activities being undertaken by GoP to strengthen
institutional capacity and financial sustainability; while the approval o f environmental quality
standards and maximum permissible emission levels for air and water, supported by this
operation, i s expected to strengthenenvironmental monitoring.

107.    At the sectoral level, policy dialogue has been facilitated, and the inter-institutional
agreements and commitments reached among various stakeholders to address the
respective environmental concerns (e.g., urban air quality, mining contamination, etc.). In
the mining sector, government reforms aimed at updating the MEL inventory and assessing
priority MELs inkey watersheds is expected to improve government actions towards remediation
o f environmental impacts. Furthermore, various government actions supported by this operation
to overcome the shortcomings o f the EIA system, especially for large-scale and complex mining
operation, is expected to improve the overall quality o f the EIA process and strengthen the
overall licensing framework. Improvements in urban air quality are another significant
environmental effect o f government actions in the energy and transport sector enhanced through
the support of this operation. These include actions to encourage the availability of cleaner fuels,
shift vehicles to clean natural gas, and scrap older polluting vehicles.

108.    The Peruvian government has mechanisms to ensure adequate consultations
opportunities which include public audiences (commonly used in the mining and energy
sectors) inorder to discuss environmental and social concerns in an open and transparent manner.
Inaddition, consultations within the framework of the proposed policies of this DPL have been
carried out through: (i)the CPS review; (ii)the Country Environmental Analysis and (iii)the
Study on the Environmental and Social Dimensions o f the Mining Sector. Consultations were
carried out with all government sectors involved, as well as with NGOs, academic institutions,
representatives o f municipalities and communities affected by mining operations, and the private
sector. These consultations include three national workshops where the results and
recommendations o f these studies were presentedand widely discussed.

C. IMPLEMENTATIONMONITORING AND EVALUATION

109.    To provide the governmentof Peru with greater certainty regardingthe availability
o f DPL DDO funds, the government and the Bank will maintain a close policy dialogue




                                                 37

throughout the drawdown period.36Duringthis period, Bank staff will monitor the borrower's
macroeconomic policy framework and its continuing adherence to the overall program every six
months.

110.      Reporting progress in the implementation of the policy reforms would be
responsibilityof each of the sectors involved (MINAM, SERNANP, OEFA, DIGESA, MEM,
MTC, and PRODUCE). MEF, in close coordination with MINAM, would be responsible for
coordinating actions and monitoring progress among concerned agencies. A recently approved
IDF (to be implemented by MINAM) would also contribute in ensuringthat MINAM and MEF
monitor the implementation of specific measuresand reforms under the DPL program.

111.      Bank staff will work with the key agencies to ensure a joint supervision in the
monitoringof projectactivities. This would allow an active flow o fpolicy dialogue and prepare
for subsequent phases. The Bank team, jointly with GoP, would assess and supervise the
implementation o f the program, focusing on whether key agencies are carrying out the agreed
policy reforms and undertaking due diligence in attaining the development objectives in
conformity with the legal agreement. Furthermore, Bank staff will assess institutional
arrangements as well as institutional capacity and commitment in GoP for the attainment o f the
agreed actions in the Policy Matrix, and confirm fulfillment o f program conditions and
conformity with legal covenants. The task team supervision will concentrate on the impact
outcomes o f the program and on any corrections that might need to be made to the operation as it
evolves. Bank supervision will be sensitive to the latest country developments, the involved
agencies capacity and commitment, overall stakeholder support, and feasible options for realizing
the program development goals.

                                Table 6: ProposedMonitoringIndicators
   Key Issues and Objectives                                 Program Outcome Indicators
 Environmental Governance
 Strengthenthe legal and                 MINAMreviews EIAs for at least 10 large infrastructurehvestment

 institutionalframework for              projects with potentially significantimpacts peryear. (Baseline for 2008:

 environmental management                INRENA reviewed77 EIAs for projects (includingmedium and small)
                                         which couldhave an impact on naturalresources).

                                         SERNANP applies financial strategyto increaseNPA finding from
                                         various sources (includingprivate sector) by at least US$2 million per
                                         year (Baseline for 2008: resourceallocationfrom various sourcesto
                                         SINANPE amount US$14.2 million per year).

                                         Air quality data for the Lima-Calla0MetropolitanRegion is widely
                                         publishedand disseminated (in real time) through a harmonized and
                                         integratedmonitoringnetwork.Air quality contingencyplans are
                                         developedand implementedwhen pollution levels largely exceed quality
                                         standards inthe 5 most pollutedcities in Peru: Lima, Arequipa,
                                         Chimbote, 110, and La Oroya (Baseline:Pollutioncontingency plans do
                                         not exist in Peru).
 Sustainable Management of
 the Mining Sector                       At least ten priority MELs are identifiedfollowing the priority setting

 Strengthenthe knowledgebase             update of the MELs inventoryand resourcesfor public/privateMEL


36The drawdownperiod is the period betweenthe loan's effectiveness date and closingdate duringwhich funds are
available for withdrawal by the borrower.

                                                         38

    Key Issuesand Objectives                              Program OutcomeIndicators
 and capacity to remediate             remediation is confirmed (Baseline:No MELs havebeen identifiedusing
 miningenvironmental liabilities       technical criteriaand resourceshave not been confirmed for
 (MELs).                              public/privateMELremediation.).

                                      Environmentalparticipatorymonitoringundertakenin at least 60 sites
                                      (Baseline: 35 community-basedmonitoringpilots are underway).

 Improving Urban Air Quality
 Improvements inthe vehicle           At least 30 percentof gas stations in main cities (approx. 750) supplying
 fleet and in fuel quality to reduce   cleandiesel (with less than 50ppm ofsulfur content) by 2010 (Baseline:

 air pollution.                       zero).

                                      At least 80,000 vehicles convertedto natural gas and 90 service stations
                                       are installed and operatingin Lima(Baseline:35,000 vehicles converted
                                      to NG in Lima).

                                       Vehicle inspection and maintenance system operating in Limawith at
                                       least 20 lanes (with at least 600,000 vehicles inspected), and at least three
                                       lanes in eachof the 3 largest cities (with at least 80,000 vehicles
                                      inspected). (Baseline:6 inspection lanes operational in Limanamely for
                                      heavy duty vehicles).

 Promoting Sustainable
 Fisheries                             100 percent o f anchovetafleet under the quota system. (Baseline:Zero

 Enhance the management,              percentregulatedby quotas)

 enforcement, and reduce fleet        At least 5,000 workers benefit from economic incentivesfor leavingthe
 over-capacity and economic           sector. (Baseline: Zero).
 inefficiencyof the fisheries
 sector.


D. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS

112.     During the preparation of the recently approved Second Programmatic Fiscal
Management and Competitiveness DPL by the Board of Directors, the Bank team
undertook a review of the current status of the country public financial management
(PFM) reforms achieved so far. These reforms are a result of the program implementation
supported by the DPL program and the recommendations of the 2001 CFAA, the 2004 IMF
Fiscal ROSC, 2005 CPAR, `and other initiatives over the last several years. The Bank's review
included a desk review of available information such as the annual external Audit Report of the
Central Bank which contained an unqualified opinion; a review of the results of IMF First
Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement (Staff Report, July 2007); and meetings with GoP
officials within MEF, and officials from the Central Bank and the Office of the Comptroller
General (CGR).

113.     PFM in Peru has significantly improved since the 2001 CFAA, which found
significant areas in need of improvement such as: (i)the uneven application of the existing tools
in the system, (ii)under-funding of the supreme audit institution (the CGR), (iii)the need for
greater oversight by the Congress, and (iv) the need for a more effective external reporting. In
recent years, GoP efforts to strengthen public finance administration has focused on (i)
strengthening supervision of the legislative branch's use of funds, (ii)increasing the
independence of the CGR and strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for the
supervision of public spending, (iii)expanding the scope and coverage of the integratedfinancial


                                                       39

administration system (Sistema Integrado de Administracibn Financiera, or SIAF) at different
levels o f government with a greater degree o f control and transparency, and (iv) modernizing the
budget process and its related monitoring tools towards improving the efficiency o f public
spending.

114.    The most relevant PFM reforms towards improving the efficiency of public
spending are well advanced and under implementation. These are: (i)a new budgetclassification
system for the 2009 budget has been implemented in line with international standards and its
being unified with the accounting chart of accounts; (ii)significant progress in the
implementation o f the Treasury Single Account at Central Government level has been achieved;
and (iii)strategic steps towards introducing result-based budgeting as a tool to improve the
efficiency o f public spending, and a new monitoring and evaluation system o f budget programs i s
being institutionalized progressively. The efforts achieved so far to modernize the budget and
improve the country PFM could be significantly scaled up and accelerated inthe coming years by
prioritizing activities within the PFM reform agenda and focusing on performance indicators and
benchmarks which can be used to measure progress over time systematically.

115.    Overall, the adoption of SIAF at sub-national level and its gradual improvement
have contributed to improvingthe transparency of public finances in Peru. The SIAF is a
cornerstone in the country's state reform process. Efforts must continue to consolidate the
integration o f the new budget classificationwith the chart o f accounts, the full implementation o f
the Treasury SingleAccount, and to ensure common standards and adequate budget and financial
reporting by all levels o f government (central and sub-national). There i s consensus that the
current platform o f the SIAF needs an overhaul, after being in place for more than 10 years.
Based on an independentevaluation by external consultants, the GoP has decided to revamp the
system completely. However, the GoP i s very conscious o f the importance o f a smooth migration
(which would take several years) to ensure that the considerable advances attained so far will not
be interruptedor reversed.Inparallel, nearly 1,000 local governments (more than half ofthe total
number o f local governments) have begun registeringtheir income and expenditures operations
through the simplified SIAF system for local governments.

116.    Peru's ongoing reforms and remainingchallenges necessitatefurther modernization
and strengthening of the PFM. As Peru continues to develop into a stable middle income
country, it will increasingly require fiduciary systems capable o f keeping up with a modernizing
economy in a variety o f sectors and at all levels o f the government. This need i s further amplified
inthe context o f the ongoing reforms inPeru. For instance, the current decentralization calls for
strengthening o f capacity of regions and municipalities to optimize the utilization o f public
funds. In its role in the modernization o f the state in Peru, and in the context o f the CPS, the
Bank i s supporting the GoP with (i)a governance AAA study focusing on sub-national
government public administration systems, and (ii)an upcoming integrated fiduciary assessment
being sought as part o f a more integrated policy study at national level-an       upcoming PER in
FY09-which      will include both diagnostic and forward-looking analysis, and recommendations.
The scope o f the fiduciary assessment will include the PFM system as a whole, and it is
envisioned that the assessment will establish a current and fact-based PFM system performance
baseline, and outline recommendations aimed at strengthening the public financial management




                                                 40

and public procurement systems in a prioritized and actionable manner. Both o f these AAA
studies (Governance and PER) are FY09 deliverables.

117.   On transparency, Peru ranks about average among Latin American countries,
comparing favorably to Brazil and Mexico, but lagging far behind countries like Chile and
Uruguay which set standards inLatin America. Inthe last few years, Congress approved a Law o f
Transparency and Access to Public Information (2003) and its regulations; also, SIAF became
available through an internet portal "Consultu Amiguble", and a pilot system for people's
assessment o f government services was launched. With the further development o f the SIAF and
continued dissemination o f budgetary information through the internet, Peru's ranking should
begin to improve. A signal o f strong commitment to improve governance and fight corruption
has been the recent creation o fthe National Anticorruption Office at the end o f 2007. Overall, the
mechanisms to fight corruption have been strengthened in all three state branches and include: (i)
the executive branch's ad-hoc prosecutors for the Fujimori-Montesinos cases and the
decentralized public anticorruptionprosecutors; (ii)the legislative branch's auditing commission;
and (iii)thejudiciary's anticorruption courts and hearing rooms.

E.DISBURSEMENTS AND AUDITS

118.   The GoP has selected a Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO) as the disbursement
mode for this operation. The DDO feature gives an IBRD borrower the option o f deferring
disbursements under a DPL for up to three years (renewable for an additional three years with the
Regional Vice President's approval),         provided that the borrower's overall program
implementation and macroeconomic policy framework remain adequate.

119.   Disbursement arrangements will follow the procedures for DPL set out in OP 8.60.
As such, the loan is expected to have a fast disbursement o f US$20 million upon effectiveness
(by mid 2009), and the remaining US$310 million will be kept as a contingency fund which
could be withdrawn on one or several tranches. The Bank (i)will deposit the funds into an
account designated by the Borrower and acceptable to the Bank which forms part o f the country's
foreign exchange reserves at the Central Bank o f Peru; and (ii)the Borrower shall ensure that
upon deposit o f the funds into said account, such amount or an equivalent amount i s credited in
the borrower's accounting system to an account that finances budgeted expenditures. The GoP
will be requiredto provide confirmation of steps (i) (ii)as soon as the tranche is received.
                                                      and
The proceeds of the loan may not be used to finance expenditures typically excluded under the
Loan Agreement.

120.   The completed 2007 IMF off-site Safeguards Assessment was not available. However, as
per the IMF Country Report No. 07/241,the Safeguards Assessment concluded that there were
no significant weaknesses inthe Central Bank`s safeguards framework, identifying few measures
to address minor weaknesses related to the duration o f the appointment o f the external auditor
and the terms o f the Organic Law on recording unrealized revaluation gains. Given that the
Bank's review o f the borrower's current PFM i s satisfactory and the conclusion that fiduciary
arrangements are adequate, the Bank will not require a dedicated account at the Central Bank for
loan proceeds and as such no audit will be required for the deposit account.




                                               41

F.RISKSAND RISK MITIGATION
121.     Macroeconomic risks relate to Peru's vulnerability to changing international
conditions. Any possible reversal in Peru's economic stability could adversely affect the
continuation o f the reforms supported by this ENVDPL. A sharp drop inthe international prices
o f Peru's main traditional exports, especially minerals, would affect the export sector and the
economy as a whole. In addition, economic turmoil due to the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the
UnitedStates -the largest market for Peruvian exports-             could lead to a decreased demand for
Peru's exports, in spite o f the recent approval o f the FTA with the U.S. Furthermore, an increase
in world interest rates (or a slowdown in lending to emerging economies) would also have
impacts on the ability o f the GoP -and o f the economy as a whole- to access credit on reasonable
terms. On the fiscal side, political pressures for higher spending with weak control on the quality
could lead to deterioration o f fiscal accounts and could potentially have additional environmental
impacts.

122.     Mitigation of these risks is being addressed in several ways. Non-traditional exports are
growing very rapidly and are the most important source o f employment growth. Furthermore, the
GoP is actively seeking to expand market access by pursuing trade agreements37with other
potential export markets in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere in Latin America. The combination of
these two trends-diversification o f products and o f markets-is             reducing the risk o f major shifts
in Peru's terms of trade due to exogenous factors. Regarding interest rate increases, the GoP's
disciplined fiscal performance in the past several years has greatly reduced country risk and
lowered interest rate spreads, meaning the cost o f rising international interest rates will be lower
than previously. The country has undergone several upgrades by credit rating agencies38,and the
increasing liquidity o f the local currency debt market for both sovereign and corporate debt-
supported by a stable currency-is          easing the country's dependence on external credit, and also
reducing dollarization o f financial markets. Furthermore, export markets continue to be a focus
o f the GoP's plan for sustained growth. The approval o f FTAs with the US and Canada will help
diversify more the country's export base away from commodities and provide an anchor for
positive investment environment. In addition, GoP implemented (and announced the
implementation of) a number o f policy measures to maintain confidence and mitigate the
foreseen adverse impact that the global crisis which include: (i) monetary policy through
                                                                            easing
the Central Reserve Bank of Peru (BCRP) increased liquidity facilities to avoid a potential credit
squeeze. BCRP announced legislation that will allow institutions like pension funds to
participate in these rep0 operations. BCRP has also reduced the marginal reserve requirements on
both local and foreign currency deposits; (ii)intervention in the foreign exchange market.
BCRP has intervened in the foreign exchange market to smooth out fluctuations and prevent a
rapid depreciation of the currency, using nearly US$ 4.5 billion in the last two months; (iii)
counter cyclical fiscal policy through adjusting the level o f public expenditures to support a
growth rate target o f at least 6 percent per year for 2009-10. Under this scenario, public
investments would be accelerated as needed, and more funds would be allocated to social and



37The GoP is working in establishing free trade agreements with Chile, the EuropeanUnion, Mexico, Singapore,
India, China, and Central America.
38The country's excellent economic performancehas led Standard& Poor'sRatings Services inJuly 2008 to raise its
foreign currency long-termcredit ratingfor Peruto `BBB-'from `BB+'and raise its local currency long-termcredit
ratingto `BBB+'from `BBB-'.

                                                       42

infrastructure expenditures, with emphasis on those programs that have a direct impact on
vulnerable families; and (iv) measures to sustain private investmentby working to ensure that
private investment flows are not affected significantly by changing risk perceptions. In
coordination with private commercial banks, authorities are identifying financial mechanisms
that would prevent a significant reduction in lending for investments in equipment, capacity
expansion and construction.

123.     Moderate risk associated with GoP's possible decline in lending (including DPLs).
If Peru continues to have a strong growth in the near-medium term with fiscal surpluses and
active liability management it could possibly contribute to a steady decline in loans (as was
experienced up to early September 2008). This could in turn risk: (i)   the program's follow-up
operations; and (ii)the continuation o f the policy dialogue with key sectors and agencies. These
risks are being mitigated by MEF's own commitment to the current program. In addition, the
Bank team has promoted the ENVDPL program to the new administration at MEF. The risk o f a
potential disruption in the policy dialogue would be mitigated by the Bank's ongoing work
program in the sectors through: (i)supervision and preparation o f GEF projects on climate
change and biodiversity conservation which would ensure close collaboration with MINAM and
SERNANP; (ii)    implementationo f an IDF grant and Carbon Finance Assist grants with MINAM;
(iii)implementationof the Lima Urban Transport Project which would allow to have policy
dialogue with the transport and energy sectors; (iv) implementation o f the extractive industries
transparency initiative (EITI) which ensures an ongoing collaboration with MEM; and (v) the
development o f sector work (one planned for the fisheries sector).

124.    The ruling party has a minority in Congress which could create difficulties in
passing legislation.This risk is currently considered to be low for the ENVDPL series since all
o f the Legislative Decrees which would have required approval by Congress have already been
passed by the Legislative branch or have been approved through the fast-track umbrella o f the
Free Trade Agreement. The pending regulations depend exclusively on the approval by the
executive branch, which are not likely to encounter any obstacles. Inaddition, MINAM has been
proactive in building its relationship with Congress which has led to unanimous approval o f
MINAM's operating budget.

125.    Institutional risks associated with the process by which the Ministry of Environment
was created. On December 19, 2007, the Peruvian Congress enacted the Law No. 29157 which
delegated to the Executive branch the power to legislate on various subjects related to the
implementation o f the Free Trade Agreement between Peru and the United States. Taking
advantage o f the European Union-LAC summit that took place in Peru in May, 2008, and
pursuant to Law No. 29157, President Garcia enacted a fast-track legislative decree creating the
Ministry o f Environment without the prior review and sanction o f Congress. This measure
created an initial antagonism and criticism, thereby diluting legitimacy to the creation o f this
institution. In addition, to an initial lack o f resources, MINAM has faced a weak capacity.
Ultimately, the executive branch approved a contingency budget and the transfer of the resources
originally destined for CONAM. Subsequently,the new Minister o f MINAMhas been proactive
inapproaching Congressand MEF, and securedtwice the annual resources which CONAM once
received. In addition, associated IDF grant would help mitigate the capacity weakness by




                                                43

providing technical assistance and enhancing capacity in key areas such as financial management
and monitoring and evaluation and inthe definition o f roles and responsibilities.

SectoralRisks

 126.    Risks within the mining sector associated with a lack of commitment by GoP to
undertakesteps leadingfor the eventual remediationof priority MELs.Despite the negative
image and social conflicts associated with MELs, the GoP has been slow to actually carry out
concrete measures to address their remediation. Moreover, depending on the location, past legal
status, and nature o f the tailings, environmental and social risks might arise if the actual
remediation is not carried out appropriately. This risk i s mitigated by GoP's gradual approach to
MELs, which has included revisions to the legal framework and the enactment and modifications
to the MELs law, establishing specific procedures and opening the door to prosecute private
sector companies whose mining concessions have already expired. In addition, MEM has
allocated resources to a fund managed by FONAM for the remediation o f specific MELs.
Building a national strategy based on a systematized and updated MEL inventory would also
contribute to minimizing this risk.

 127.    Risks related to fisheries sector associated with challenges to the recent Legislative
Decree establishing vessel quotas in the anchoveta fleet. While the new Legislative Decree
(No. 1084) establishing vessel quotas has been welcomed by the large and most efficient vessel
companies as well as by environmentalists, the smaller boat builders have mostly rejected it for
fear o f losing competitiveness and beingpushedout o f the sector. The commercial fleet workers,
however, have been more inclined to agree with the compensation package that the law also
provides to those who voluntarily leave the sector, or entitlements relating to early retirement.
While main opposition parties have presented a proposal in Congress to rescind the legal decree
that establishes the quota system, the reversal o f the Legislative Decree i s considered to be
minimal. Opposition in congress to the decree has been winding down, and the new Minister of
Production (which was well received by Congress) has been proactive in meeting and engaging
in discussions with fisheries associations, unions, and affected fisherman to incorporate their
concerns and comments inthe proposed regulation to the Legislative Decree.

 128.   Another risk relates to thepotentialfor workers leaving commercial anchovetafishing
for fishmeal processing, thereby creating extraordinary pressures on artisanal fishermen and
actual fish resources. While the GoP has frozen permits for the opening o f new fishmeal plants,
new plants are being opened on the southern coast.39This situation has provoked claims from
one union of artisanal fishermen that is concerned with the fishery resource impacts o f these
plants. To address this, the Minister has agreed to review the permit granting process and to
revoke permits ifmistakes were made intheir issuance.

129.    Low risk associated with the implementation of the Inspection and Maintenance (IM)
system in the Lima Metropolitan Region. While the efforts to launchthe IMsystem for the Lima
Metropolitan Region have been hindered by legal disputes involving concession and operating
rights between the municipality of Lima, the municipality o f Callao and the winning private
bidder, the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC) has recently been given the


39The government'sposition is that these permitswere given beforethe freeze became effective.

                                                      44

responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the IM system. Parallel discussions on
alternatives to harmonize standards between Lima's metropolitan region and other regions are
also underway. In August, 2008, the MTC published regulation (N" 025) establishing the rules,
control and responsibilities for the IM program for Lima. Since the MTC has assumed the
oversight of the IM system, implementation has been carried out in a satisfactory manner. The
MTC has also specified that vehicles tested in plants outside o f Lima can circulate in the capital,
thus giving validity to inspection processes elsewhere in the country. Even though a number of
details still need to be regulated, the MTC expects an increase in the installation o f new IM
plantsinthe country.




                                               45

Annex 1: Letterof DevelopmentPolicy(Spanish)




          CARTADE POU77CASECIORML




                     46

                                                                 LUIS Ab. VALOlVIESOMONTAN0
                                                                           MlNlSlRO


&as, aurnenta s / g M d v o de Ias Importactones (58,6%en el primer smestre de este
sno) y e! CMRO banmdo a1sectorpISvad0 (29,W en elprimor semestm).

Paraeste ai70 SB prevt3 uncmtniento d d PBi de 9.0%COR una variecibnpomnfuel de
demenda interne de 11,556, pw lo que en los Siguienfes rneses e/ PBl se esterla
ubicando a h por encima de su nh/el patencief (quo estimmos Bfredsdar de 7%). La
polftica rnacroewnbmica que el Gobierno e&& lmplementendo tiene por objetb
mcd0mr est0 exprsnsi6n con el objeto de hacefla consistante con el crecjmjenta
potential. De esta manera, se evitan las presiones infiaciantuias y se garantka un
cnxkniontosostenid0y no vdbtu.

hel excesoI&,de teniendoen cuenb tantola disminucidnde
    r otro                                                 10sterminosde inbtwmbio y
               le demanda interno sabre el pmducto, el resultadode la balanza en cuenta
mrrlente oxtema     $8 ha vuelto negativo este aifo, luego de tres ai)m ds supen5vft. Se
estuna un dMcR en cuenta coniente de 1.6%del PBI durante el 2008. Este cambio en
la cuenta CDnjente no mns!fWye un riesgo macmscondmlco debido a que se financk
principalmenfe can fiujosde invedn exbrnadirecta. Sin embargo, es un hecho queno
d e b psrdorse de vista cuendo SB disenan las poiiticas mamecondmlces de cod0
pkuo y es impartante bgmr supen3vit fisceles altos en estos ~Ao9.Es'slas supers&
fjenencan4cterpwntiVodemo a1detedomdel ahom prlvado onginadopor el excesb
d8 wnsumo. De esta manera, frenfe a una fBdrn&I del ahnm privado, el shorn,
p0bf.b d e b aumntar con el obletu de amenguer IBS           psiones sabre la cuents
wmentede la brrlanzsdepagm.


8.Reformasasoeiadasal Pmgrama

I .      Gobemabilidad Amblenbi

1.7.     Con el objetivo de rnejomr 18 gestidn amtnental en el pais y reduck Ia
         disporslbn y  85c~sc)  coordineck5n de acciones en este campo, en m a p de
         2008 mediante Decreto Legislsfivo N' 1013, se cc88 el Minkteno dol
         Arnbienb, junto con el Organisma de Evalueci6n y Fiscalizecldn Ambfental
         (OEFA) encergodo de la flsca/izacbn, la supervisiOny fa sancibn en materia
         ambienfal en el pais. Actuelmente, se est4 cornpletando el promso de
         implemenbci6n del nuevo Mlnisterioy     scf espra que le OEFA se encuentm
         en pleno fundonamten!o el pnixirno a h . Aslmismo, en sefiembre de este aifo
         se cre6 el Setvido Nmional de h a s Naturales Pmtegidas por el EstBdo
         (SERNANP) con el obj%tivode meprar lo odministmcidnpara su conservaci6n
         y el eprovechorniento del potential do estas &#as. Le creacien de estas
         instituciones 8s una apuesta por el futuro de enonne impartancia psra              ,

         sustentar el crecimienlo econdrnico mobre la base de una msjw utilkacidn de
         nuestms mursae y la pmservocidn del medlo smbiente. Loa rebs son
         grandes consUemndo las demandas que enfrentanuestra poblacidn, erjn con
         sisnifcativos nivelss de pobrezs, per0 simufthneamente can la presancia de
         espectos en materia de gestk3n amblental que requiemnurgonts atencibn.



                       Jr. juoln 3lG:Urna I TsUfano: 311-6&30                           2




                                             47

.

         'DEQHIO OE lA5PCRy)Nhs CON DISCAPACIDADEN ELPEW
             'AN0 DEW CUMM?%MUNDIAUSfNELPERU*




 1.2. De ofro lado, el EsWo perueno cuonfa con Ltmites MBxlmOs Permkfbk y
      stendems de Calldad Ambientai mientsmente apmbadas para ahis, ague y
      para dlversas ecfhfidades indushfales, cuye carencl6 impedie un adecuado
      monltomo y fiscalizaoidnen meteria embientalque se ml?et enproblemas en
      le calidad del ague y de contaminacf6n del ah. Se espre dumnte los
      siguienfes a h que est8 confroi pcnnita m e w la calided de vida de los
      dud8danoqjunto con la impkmmtaci6n de otrss refommasque seguidemente
      se&Wen.

 1.3. En este mismo sentldo, en eJ marm de presupuesto pw resuttados, en el
      pmyecfo de Ley de Presupueato 2009 sa ha inoorporedo como pngmma
      estmklgieola gesNcSn ambkntel ptlontarfa, en& otms cuatm progmsq can
      Bnfasis en la cantamhacidndel 8irey egua,y 01 desemiIo de la biadivsmkiad.
      Adkbnelmente, 8e he pmvisfo que /as universidades p1Iblk8s que reciben
      canon, sobrecenon y regaiiss minew puedan gastar dlchos recum, entre
      otms esciones, para financierinvestigocionesde clenda apIlcadamlacionedas
      con pmastvaCi6rr de le btudfversidad y el ecosistema de le zona geognifca de
      int7uencie donde se demmdh tes ac!/vidades econdm!cas extractives y le
      utilizack5neffcicnte de emrglas renovabbs y p r 0 ~ e . mpmductivos.
                                                                    ~

 2.   Gesti6n Sasfenible en el Secfor MInerfa

 2.1. La minerlejuega unpapel trascendentalen nuestropals, poi la riqusza que ha
      prodvcido y por e! qmn potenciel de m u m s naturales que pmernos. No
      obstante, it3 actividadminefa tambi$n tien0efecfos ambienfeles que deben ser
      pmvistos y remedjados. En este sentido, se vJene trabajando en mefirat la
      infomack5n y las cepacidades seetotiales para atender 10s pasivas mineros,
      tanto aqueilos da msponsabiidad del Estado, oomo supervlsan& y
      fiscalizaandolos pssivos de mponsab1idad del sector privado y aquellos que
      @&mente SB encuenitan sin propietanb. Para eN0, se ha inidado la revisi6n
      del inventatto de pashas rnineros B nkel naciml, priorkando ios m$s
      urgentes de atenci6n en base e criteriosarnbientales, econdrnlcosy de selud
      poblka, con mires a avanz%rhm.8 una ssfide remediacidn y su psulaUna
      rsduccirin. Se cspem que hada 2011 se haye podido avanzer en el proceso
      de remediac&n de bs pasivos m$s priOriw*mde/pals.

 2.2. Asimismo, mediante el Decreto Legislath N' 1042 de junb de 2008, se han
      reallzado Impmantes modificecioes nomatfves en la Ley de Pasivas:Minems
      (W 28271) con el objetivo de feciliary asegurarla remediscidn de /ospasivos
      pw patie del seciw privado. Sin embargo, alin se requiem f6rtdmr estos
      procesos y avanzar en la agilizack5nde la aprob8~% de 10s planes de c i m .
      En este sentido,la remedladdn de pasfvos s& uno de la* temas centrales en
      el sectw minem eniassiguientese8os.

 2.3. De otm lado, con la finaNdsd de fortelecer la gabemobilidad social en fa
      minsda, 6n mayo y&nh de este aAo (Decreto Supremo N' 028-2OOB-EM y
      Resolucl&nMinisterialN' 304-2008-MEWDM, mspedivemente) se apmbd una
      nuem normativapare otdenar y brindarmayor trcnspamncia8 la particpackjn


                      Jr. Junln313 Utne 1
                                    -           Tellfano: 37f 4 3 0             3




                                               48

  @rn
       'CC&MO DE W PEPSNASCON WWAODPD EN ELPERd'




     dudadana en la cwrcesidn, expbmci&n, y expbtacidn de la acfivkiad rninem.
     Esta normativa incorpore nuevos mecanismus de perticipacidn dudadana que
     garonthen el e/enlciO de este dmctm y contribuyen a la prevenctcln de
     conflictossocloembientalesy a la constmcciin de ansensm. En oste sentido,
     SB espera en b s      siguientea aAos cansoMar pmcesos de monkorno
     padclpetiw con la partlclpecldnplene de /aspablaciones involocmdas en 10s
     diversospmyectm en minerla.

2.4, C a b Micar que n m a s slmffams se hen desanullado pam o! sector
     hldmrixums e fin de homogeneirary garantharla partidpacirSn ciudadanaen
     10s respectlvos pmjmtos de inversicx, que desanufle el sector privsdo.
     Asimismo, $8 est& realkando un trabajo cowdinado enho las dhlsas
     entidades ostatales a fln de pmvenir ConflEdOs que hcuentemente tienen
     lugar por &Ita de una edecuado comunbcibn hacia la poblncidn y/o por et
     nkel de insatisfacckjnque perciben frente8 sus necesidodes.

3.   Calfdad d d A h

3.7, Unode 10saspect08 rn& lmpwtantes a la salud ambientel est8 vincul6do a la
     contaminecidn del aim, que as m8s gmve on /as primpales cludsdes de
     nuestro pals, slendo el principal contarnlnante 18s emisiones del pai-que
     vehicular461m o lo seAalan estudiosdel Banco Mundialy el rocisnte infome
     de la Defensorie del Pueblo. En ese sentido, so est6 trabajando tanto en el
     mejofornlento de la callded de combustibles que se ufilizen en el pais,
     principelmenfedel diesel, esl corn0 an le renovaudn del poque sutomotor, el
     cual cuenta enpromedio mn m8s de 15 a#os de antlgoedad.

3.2. En cuanto a la calidod de loa combustibles,an mano dc 2006 se aprobd la
     Ley N' 28694 p m logrer lalaemdicacidn graduaf del diesel can alto contendo
     do ezuh, &ableclendo          meta que hacia finos de 2010 se reduzca
     significathromente el contenido de azufrt?en et diesel que se mmetcialki? en
     mglamenfodo esta Ley se ssfoblecism montos 40s del lmpuesioSelectivoai
     ai PeM (de 2,500 a 50 partes por miMn). Complementanamente, mediante el

     Consumo (ISC} que sedn apkados a bs combustibles desde el eiio 2008
     hasia el eAo 2016, feniendo en cmnta oi criterlo de proporcionalidi?d a1grad0
     de nocivictad por 10s contaminantes que Qstos contengon, de tal manera que,
     pare el aAo 2076,/os combustiWesmds conterninantescomo ol dlesei,ester&
     afecfos a mayores montos de ISC en relaci6n a tos mema contaminantes
     wmo el gas natura(GNV) cup ISC es cero

3.3. De otm lado, con el objetiwo de pmpiciar el msumo de combustibles mhs
     limpbs y lograr un cembio gmdual en Is math energdtica del pais, dosde el
     2006, can epoya de io CoporecidnFinanciemde Desanullo (CUFKIE},se he
     venido Incentivando la conversidn de vahlculos a combustibles m8s limpios
     como el gas natural, a fin do de epmvechar al rn&wimo bs bsneficios
     econdmicosy medkwmblentalesgcinemdos por su masificacibn. Se espera
     que hacia fines de 2010 elredador de 80,000 vehlcubs so hayan oonvertidoe
     GNW. Asimismo, se vienepmoviendo la iostslacibnde la meywcanwad de




                                        49

                                                           LUIS M. VALDIVlESOMUWAAIO '
                                                                    MlNISTRO


      estaclones de sewlcios y tderes de conversl6n a GNV. Actudmente, existen
      37 estaclones de sonkb, 176 talleres de conversibn y mds de 38,000
      vehfculosconvertidos8 GNV.

3.4.  De o b le&, ants b urgente necesMed de conter con un sistema est8ndar de
     revldones tekmices vehiculams, en meyo de 2008 medmnte Ley No28231 se
      establece et Skiems Naclanel de lnspecclones TBcnicas Vehiculares ax, el
      objetho de mrt/i%xrel buen funclonemiento del mantenlmiento de Ios
      vehlculos con el objeto de garantizar la soguddad del fransporte y /as
     COndjCiOnesambienteles saludables. Se espere que en los prrsXimosdos &os
     la adecuada fiscalkacidn de la aplicacl6n de estas inspecxiones pem8a que
     circukn vehicukzs en adecuades Oondkkma para reducir la corrtaminacitk,
     corn mnsecoencladelparque aufomotor.

3.5. El Gobiemo Peruano tambit% vlene sdoptando polrticeS que ptumueven la
     racionalizacidn del perque rnedianfe desguase o chatom vehicular. En &
     prdximos dos abos, se t h e prevfsto incenti&r la renovacjdn del peque
     automotorde vehlculosdiese/ a trev&sdel chatamo de los v e h k u hw n m$s
     de die2 eaos de antigriediid,pramoVEend0 la renovadbnde/psrque automotor
     8 vahlculos  ligeros nueyos que mnwman gasofha yib GNV. Se esperaM e r
     en el wrto plazo btindar lncenthros ternhi& en el transporte urban0 a fin de
     acelerar su mnovoclbn.

4.   Sustenlbilidaden el SectorPesca
4.7. trimportantes
        e pmducciOn de herin8 y eceite de pescado que se realiro e psriir de io$
        e c u m dedel
                    sncfioveta y anchoveta blame 9s una de tas aclivMades mBs
                       sector pesquem en t&rminosde divisas y empleo en nuestro
     pals. No obstante,la experiencle do 10s dlfimos aAos ha puesto en e./dencfa
     que los insirumentos de regufscidn apllcados a la scUvMad extracfh de esie
     mcumo,no han brindado el m a m necesariopam una explotffckhe&#ente, el
     desamttu de mejoms condlcionos para el enipleo del sector y un mejar
     cuidado ambkntal. La reguiacibo aplicsda hs acasionado una c8rrw-a
     dmmedida entre /os agontes, quienes mpiten por obtener en el menor
     tiempo posible le mtixima pmpmidn de la cuata global autodteda para Is
     ternparads. E&       canem EOnst&ye uns setia amenaza pera el medlo
     smbiente, el concentmrse todo el esfuerzopesguem en cada vez menos dlas
     con el fm de no exceder la mota global,acongesiiona y contamifla [as bahfes
     de pesca, lo cud obilga a IC%ermedot??~ dewlwr al mar parte de la csptura

     por largos H e m p de espera de 10s aproxim%damente 1,200 b a r n quo
     cuinciden en p m s dies en lasplantas indusirialespera desargar dpescado
     o implde on edecuada iratamiento de 10s deshechos del p m s a de
     fabrfcecidnde hatine de pscado.

4.2  Pam revertir esta situacidn, enjunb de est8 aAo medimte &weto Legislative
     No 1084, se apmbamn nuevos instrumentos regulatonbs a fin de intmduclr Is
     limifacibn de lo copscidad extractive de ius egentes mediants cuotas
     lndfvidveles. El abjetfvo es gensrar CoRdkbnes que permitan fortalecsr el


                    Jr, Junin 919 Uma 'I
                                 -       Tdbfono: 311-5930                      5




                                         50

              -ARODEwCUMWE     MUNDIAWENELPERF    .




       amhl de lo explotecidn de h x m u m hidrubbk5gicuspar parts de ias
       auMdt?des competentes, al permitlr una pesca mAs otdenada y en
       mnsecuemiw una mejor getMn ombmntaf en le exphtacidn del wwrso de la
       anchomtw. Adicionalmenie, la lntmdrrccidn de esta nueva medida de
       odenamiento pesguero pemitld en 10s              siguientes ofim una rnejor
       planifiiaclbn en 18s qaeraciones pesqueras a1 elimlnev la incertidumbm de \a
       c a m par a1 recufso, lo que cwstltuya un importante incentive para invertir
       en mejora5 on la calkiaddel procesomlento de henna y eceite de pescedo y
       tambidnen actividadesvinculadrmsa1consumohumano dimdo.

4.3.   Est0 signfficeh camblo regvlatarfo M atxrmpeffado de divgrsas medidas
       para mitigar 106 efectos de le reduccidn de flote sabre la fuerra laboral, Ell0
       incluye el dssamllo do un progreme vofunterfo de reconveaidn laboral, el
       desarrallo de micro y pequeties emprms, y esquemas de jubliacidn
       adebniadw para b s trabejadores asoclados B la flota excedcnfe, financiado
       porlos armadorescomprendidosdentm dol esquemode cuotas indivjduales.

4.4.   Finelmente, tambibn se ha fortalecMlo lo fiscalizecidnyyopJicsci6ndesanciones
       a fin de asqurer la explotocidn mlonal de la pes-       evitar la pesca 17egaly
       permifir que el derecho de propiedad de las embamciones pesqueras que
       Aan sido suatituidasy que no cuentencon el pennlso de p e a , $e ejen8 sin
       afectar la conservaclbn y el us0 sostmido de tas recursm hkimbioMgicos,
       principslmente anchoveta y sardine. En 10s siguientes afios se espem
       continuar rnejorando el maim regulatorio del sclctor &cia otres espacies a fin
       de incrernenfar la competitividad del &or.

condusmn

Corno se desprende de lo damnlo, el Gobiem Psnrano cantin08 reaftzando
hporfantgsaccfonespara mnsolldar un crechnientoocondmicosostenido ammpaAado
de una mayw eficioncia y equidod en fa ssignecih d9 10s recufsos pbbjbbos, as1 cwno
de uno g e W ambientel rosponsabie.

El Gobierno se mpmmete B continuer avanzsndo en estos 8nibitoq para lo cual
reqummseguir contandocon el apyo del Banco Mundielen las Bread sefiaiadas.

En virtud do la meniiestado, por me& de la presnte ef Gobierno Peruano sdicita la
aprobacidndelgP&stamoPmgramAticode PONficaAmbientel?


Afentamte




             \
               4




                                                                                -
                     Jr. Junln 318 -Lima 1  Tclbfono: 311-5830                      6




                                             51

                          Annex 1: Letter of DevelopmentPolicy (English)




              "DECADE OF HANDICAPPEDPEOPLE IN PERU"
              "YEAR OF WORLD SUMMITS IN PERU"


Lima
                                                                              LUISM. VALDIVIESOMONTAN0
                                                                                       MINlSTRO

OFFICUL LETTER No-2008-EF/lO


                                         SECTOR POLICY LETTER


Mr. Robert B. Zoellick
President
 WorldBank


Reference:       Programmatic Environmental Policy Loan


Dear Mr. Zoellick,

Iherewithexpressthecommitmentof PresidentAlan GarciaPerez's Governmenttocontinueimplementing
an economicpolicy that is geared toward development based on a continuousflow ofprivate investment, as
well as an aggressiveprogram to improve the eflciency and quality of public expenditures. Thesepolicies
will allow the inclusion of disadvantaged sectors of the population, thus bringing the benefits of economic
growth and decentralization to thepopulation.

 Under this j-amework, the initial operation of the "Programmatic Environmental Policy Loan" has been
developed with the World Bank (WB),for the requested amount of US$25 million. This loan will include
specific actions aimed at: I) strengthening environmental governance in the country, io sustainable
management in the mining sector, iii) the improvement of air quality, and iv) sustainability in thefishery
sector.

Peru's economic context is described below,followed by the objectives and reforms made and theproposals
for the requestedloan.

A. Economic Context

 The Peruvian economy isfacing a diflcult international context. The crisis in the US. economy caused by
the mortgage market has affected financial markets, requiring Government intervention through a rescue
package that was recently approved by the US. Congress.Added to this is the increase in the international
prices of petroleum andfood which has unleashed a worldwide wave of inflation. In our country, despite
this adversesituation, economic growth continues to be solid and is mainly associatedwith the dynamics of
internal demand. During thefirst half of 2008, real GDP grew 10.3%, driven by the 12.5% increase in
internal demand. This growth is explained by higher private spending in a context of high business


                                                    52

expectations, a signiJicant increase in imports (58.6% in thefirst hay of this year), and bank credit to the
private sector (29.0% in thefirst hayof thisyear).

For this year, a 9.0%growth in GDP isforecasted, with an 11.5%variation in internal demand; thus, in the
coming months the GDP would still remain above itspotential level (which we estimate at around 7%). The
objective of the macroeconomic policy that the Government is implementing is to moderate this expansion
in order to make it consistent withpotential growth. This way, the pressures of inflation are avoided, and
sustained non-volatile growth is assured.

In addition, taking into account both the decrease in trade terms and the excess internal demand on the
product, the result of the balance of the current account has become negative this year, after three years of
surplus. The current account is expectedto show a 1.6%deficit in the GDP during 2008. This change in the
current account does not constitute a macroeconomic risk because it is mainlyfinanced byflows of direct
foreign investment. However, it is a fact that must not be overlooked when short-term macroeconomic
policies are designed,and it is important to achieve highfiscal surpluses in theseyears. Thesesurpluses are
preventive in nature, due to the deterioration inprivate savings caused by excess consumption. Thus, in the
face of reduction in private savings, public savings must increase with the objective of lesseningpressures
on the current account of the balance ofpayments.


B. Reforms Associated with the Program


1.      Environmental Governance

 1.1.    With the objective of improving environmental management in the country and reducing the
        scattered, limited coordination of efforts in this area, Legislative Decree No1013 of May 2008
        created the Ministry of Environment, together with the Environmental Assessment and
        Enforcement Agency (Organism0 de Evaluacion y Fiscalizacion Ambiental [OEFA]), in charge
        of the enforcement, supervision and penalization of environmental issues in the country. The
        process of implementing the new ministry is currently being completed, and OEFA is expected to
        be fully functional next year. Moreover, the National Service of State-Protected Natural Areas
        (Servicio Nacional de Areas Naturales Protegidas por el Estado [SERNANP]) was created in
        September of this year with the objective of improving administration for the conservation of
        these areas and the use of their potential. The creation of these institutions is a bidfor the highly
         importantfuture based on better use of our resources and the preservation of the environment.
         The challenges are great, considering the demands faced by our population: there are still
        signifcant levels of poverty but at the same time there are environmental management issues
        that require urgent attention.

 1.2.   On the other hand, the Peruvian Government has Maximum Permissible Limits and
        Environmental Quality Standards that have recently been approvedfor air, water and various
        industrial activities. The lack of these limits and standards had hindered adequate environmental
        monitoring and enforcement, as reflected in air quality and water pollution problems. In the
        comingyears, this control is expected to improve the quality of life of citizens, together with the
        implementation of other reforms that are detailed below.

 1.3.   In this same sense, under the framework of a results-based budget, the 2009 Budget bill has
        included priority environmental management as a strategic program, among four other
        programs, with emphasis on air and water pollution and the development of biodiversity. Among
        other activities, it also allows public universities that receive mining taxes, surtaxes, and
        royalties to spend these resources tofinance applied science research related to thepreservation


                                                      53

     of the biodiversity and ecosystem of the geographic zone of influence where extractive economic
     activities and the efficient use of renewable energy andproductive processes are carried out.

2.   Sustainable Management in theMining Sector

2.I. Mining plays an essential role in our country due to the wealth it has produced and our great
     natural resources potential. However, mining activity also has environmental effects that should
     be foreseen and remediated. In this regard, work is underway to improve sectoral information
     and skills in order to deal with mining liabilities, both those that are the State's responsibility
     and supervising and overseeing those that are the private sector's responsibility and those that
     are legally without owners. Thus, a nationwide review of the inventory of mining liabilities has
     begun, prioritizing those that require urgent attention based on environmental, economic and
     public health criteria, with the aim of moving toward their firm remediation and gradual
     reduction. Progress is expected to be made by 2011 in the process of remediating the country's
     top-priority liabilities.

2.2. In addition, Legislative Decree No1042 of June 2008 made significant regulatory mod$cations
     to the Mining Liabilities Law (No 28271) with the objective of facilitating and ensuring the
     remediation of liabilities by the private sector. However, it is still necessary to strengthen these
     processes and move forward to streamline the approval of closure plans. In this regard, the
     remediation of liabilities will be one of the key issues in the mining sector over the comingyears.

2.3. Furthermore, for the purpose of strengthening social governance in mining, a new regulation
     was approved in May and June of this year (Supreme Decree No028-2008-EM and Ministerial
     Resolution No304-2008-MEWDM respectively) to organize and provide greater transparency
     to citizen participation in the concession, exploration and development of mining activities. This
     regulation incorporates new citizen participation mechanisms that guarantee the exercise of this
     right and contribute to the prevention of socio-environmental conflicts and to consensus
     building. In this regard, it is hoped that participatory monitoring processes, with the full
     participation of populations involved in various mining projects, can be consolidated in the
     comingyears.

2.4. It should be noted that similar regulations have been developedfor the hydrocarbons sector in
     order to standardize and guarantee citizen participation in the respective investment projects
     that are being developed by the private sector. Likewise, the various state agencies are working
     in coordination to prevent conflicts that Ji.equently take place due to the lack of proper
     communication with thepopulation and/or to thepopulation 's degree of perception that its needs
     are not being met.

3.   Air Quality

3.I. One of the aspects of most importance to environmental health is associated with air pollution,
     which is most serious in our country's large cities. Theprincipal source of pollution comes>om
     vehicle emissions, as indicated by WorldBank studies and the recent report by the Ombudsman's
     Office (Defensoria del Pueblo). In this regard, work is underway to improve the quality of fuels
     used in the country, especially diesel, and to renew the vehiclefleet, which is an average of over
     15years old.

3.2. In terms of fuel quality, Law No28694 was approved in March 2006 to achieve the gradual
     eradication of diesel with high surfur content. This law established the target of sign$cantly
     reducing the sulfur content of diesel marketed in Peru (2,500 to 50parts per million) by the end
     of 2010. As a complement, through the regulation of this law,fixed amounts of the Selective Tax


                                                   54

     on Consumption (Impuesto Selectivo a1 Consumo [ISC]) were established. These amounts will
     be applied to fuels Porn 2008 to 2016, taking into account the criterion of the proportionate
     harmfulness of the contaminants contained in these fuels, so that by 2016 thosefuels, such as
     diesel, that pollute the most will be subject to higher ISC amounts in relation to lesser pollutants
     such as natural gas (VNG) whose ISC is zero.

3.3. In addition, with the objective of facilitating the consumption of cleaner fuels and achieving a
     gradual change in the country's energy matrix, the conversion of vehicles to cleaner fuels such
     as natural gas has been encouraged since 2006, with the support of the Financial Development
     Corporation (Corporacion Financiera de Desarrollo [COFIDE]), in order to maximize the
     economic and environmental benefits generated by its large-scale use. It is expected that, by the
     end of 2010, around 80,000 vehicles will have been converted to VNG. Moreover, the
     installation of a large number of service stations and VNG conversion shops is being promoted.
     Currently, there are 37 service stations and 115 conversion shops, and over 38,000vehicles have
     been converted to VNG.

3.4. Furthermore, due to the urgent needfor a standardized systemfor the technical inspections of
     vehicles, Law No 29237 of May 2008 established the National System for the Technical
     Inspection of Vehicles (Sistema Nacional de Inspecciones Tecnicas Vehiculares) with the
     objective of certifying theproper function of vehicle maintenance in order to guarantee transport
     safety and healthy environmental conditions. In the next two years, it is hoped that the proper
     enforcement of these inspections will allow vehicles to operate under adequate conditions to
     reducepollution caused by vehicular traffic.

3.5. The Peruvian Government is also adopting policies that promote the rationalization of thefleet
     by turning old vehicles into scrap metal. In the next two years, there are plans to encourage the
     renovation of the diesel vehiclefleet by scrapping vehicles over I O years old, thus promoting the
     renovation of thefleet with new, lighter vehicles that consumegasoline and/or VNG.In the short
     term, it is hoped that incentives can also be provided to urban transportation in order to
     accelerate its renovation.


4.   Sustainabilityin the Fishery Sector
4.7. Theproduction offish meal and oil, which uses anchoveta and white anchoveta resources, is one
     of the most important activities of the fishery sector in terms of foreign exchange and
     employment in our country. However, the experience of the past two years has shown that the
     regulatory instruments applied to the extraction of this resource have not provided the necessary
     Pamework for efficient operation,for the development of better employment conditions in the
     sector andfor better care of the environment. The regulation applied has caused an uncontrolled
     race among agents, who compete to obtain in the shortest time possible the maximum amount of
     the overall quota authorized for the season. This race constitutes a serious threat to the
     environment by concentrating the entirefishing effort in fewer andfewer days offishing, which
     obliges ship owners to return a part of their catch to the sea, congests and contaminates bays
     due to long waits at processing plants to unload their fish, and impedes proper treatment of
     wastePorn theprocess of manufacturing fish meal.

4.2. To reverse this situation, in June of this year Legislative Decree No I084 approved new
     regulatory instruments in order to introduce a limitation on agents' extractive capacity by means
     of individual quotas. The objective is to create conditions that make it possible to strengthen of
     control of hydro-biological resource exploitation by allowing more orderly fishing and
     consequently better environmental management in the use of anchoveta resources. In addition,
     the introduction of this new fishery planning measure will allow better planning in fishery

                                                  55

        operations over the coming years by eliminating uncertainty regarding the race for this
        resource. This constitutes an important incentive to invest in improvements in the quality offish
        meal and oilprocessing and also in activities associated with direct human consumption.

4.3.    This signifcant regulatory change will be accompanied by various measures to mitigate the
        effects of fleet reduction on the work force. This includes the development of a voluntary job
        conversion program and of micro- and small enterprises and early retirement schemes for
        workers associated with the surplusfleet, financed by ship owners who arepart of the individual
        quota scheme.

4.4.    Finally, the enforcement and levying of penalties have been strengthened in order to ensure the
        rational development offishing, avoid illegalfishing and allow the right of ownership offishing
        boats that have been replaced and lack fishing permits to be exercised without affecting the
        conservation and sustainable use of hydro-biological resources, especially anchoveta and
        sardines. It is hoped that the sector's regulatory framework will continue to improve in the
        comingyears, moving toward other species in order to increase the sector's competitiveness.


Conclusion

As demonstrated in the above descriptions, the Peruvian Government continues to carry out important
efforts aimed at consolidating sustainable economic growth, accompanied by greater eflciency and
fairness in the allocation of public resources, as well as by responsible environmental management.

The Governmentis committed to continuingto moveforward in these matters,for which it needs to continue
receiving the WorldBank's support in the areas indicated.

In light of the above, the Peruvian Government hereby requests the approval of the "Programmatic
Environmental Policy Loan. "

Sincereb,




                                                      56


 -a
 s    -a
       m
       C




a

 L
cc
 c
zQ
 z
I F

 Q
 L
c
:-
 V

&
-

 . . . .  0 ..    G
                  5 ..




              +-

        I
1




        I
I                  I
       I

                  Annex 4: ComplementaryProjectsof the World Bank Group

   Lima Urban Transport Project. The main objective o f this $45 million loan is to assist the
   Municipality o f Metropolitan Lima (MML) in enhancing the economic productivity and the
   quality o f life within the Lima Metropolitan area by improving mobility and accessibility for
   the metropolitan population. The link to this operation is mainly through its air quality
   monitoring activities. The ENVDPL would seek the development o f a monitoring protocol to
   integrate all the air quality monitoring networks inthe Lima metropolitanregion.

   Participatory Management of Protected Areas Project. This GEF grant of $14.8 million seeks
   to: i) insure biodiversity conservation by increasing the involvement o f civil society
   institutions and the private sector in planning and sustainable management o f at least five
   protected areas (PA) o f the Peruvian System o f Natural Protected Areas (SINANPE), and one
   PA to be created during project implementation; and ii)obtain sustainability for the financing
   o f recurrent cost in SINANPE. The project builds upon the experience gained during the first
   GEF Grant to PROFONANPE, supporting the Trust Fund's establishment and development of
   its capacity to attract financial resources for conservation. This operation would be related to
   the DPL inthat it is contributing to the government's efforts indeveloping its strategy for PAS
   and the sustainable financial strategy.

   Proposed GEF-National System for Protected Areas Proiect (PRONANP). The proposed
   US$10 million grant will seek to integrate the efforts o f governmental agencies, multilateral
   and bilateral donors, civil society, and the private sector to lay the foundations for a broader
   future National Program for Protected Areas under the country's new decentralized
   framework. The proposed GEF grant will be blended with the proposed ENVDPL. The
   actions and reforms proposed relation to biodiversity conservation under Environmental
   Governance would contribute and complement the activities in the proposed GEF project. A
   close collaboration is taking place inthe preparation o f both projects.

   Public Transport Improvement Lima Project. This $8.15 million grant from the GEF aims at
   facilitating greenhouse gases reduction from ground transport in the Metropolitan Area o f
   Lima-Calla0 (Le. the provincial municipalities o f Lima and Callao4') through the promotion o f
   a long-term modal shift to more efficient and less polluting forms o f transport, such as non-
   motorized transport and high-capacity public transport vehicles operated on segregated
   busways. A better-quality urban transport system will enhance the competitiveness o f the city
   and will improve the quality o f life o f its population in general and that o f low-income
   groups4' in particular. The efforts under this project would complement the air quality policy
   reforms proposed under the DPL.

   Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Project (EITI). This multi-donor $300,000 trust
   fund has the purpose to support the GoP in the implementation of the EITI, adopted by the


40Callao and Lima are provincial municipalities, Lima and Callao being subdivided into 46 municipal districts.
41The project's NMT component spans over several low-income neighborhoods while the segregated busways
system supportedby the GEF serves poor outlying municipalities and link them with the city centre, hence providing
low-income people with better accessibility tojob opportunities


                                                        61

 GoP through Executive Decree No. 027-2006-EM. The EITI is aimed at, inter alia: (a)
 increasing the transparency of extractive industries payments and revenues; (b) the setting up
 of an EITI National Committee; and (c) the implementation of an action plan (the Peru EITI
 Action Plan) to establish mechanisms that ensure total transparency in the transfer of
 payments of the extractive industries (i.e. oil, gas and mining) to the GoP, as well as its
 subsequent transfer to the relevant Recipient's governmental bodies at the central, regional
 and local levels. The proposed changes in the environmental and social governance, which
 also aim at increased transparency and public participation, would complement the
 government's efforts within the framework of EITI.


0Second Programmatic Fiscal management and Competitiveness Development Policy Loan
 (FMCDPL). The proposed US$ 370 million DPL is intended to be the second in a series of
 four loans supporting the GoP's reform program to improve the functioning of Peru's public
 sector institutions and business environment. The loan supports two broad areas of policy
 reform: (i)Efficiency and Quality of Fiscal Management; and (ii)Competitiveness. There are
 close linkages between the proposed ENVDPL and the Fiscal DPL given that the proposed
 policy reforms under the FMCDPL are likely to lead to positive environmental management
 outcomes, particularly related to improved monitoring and evaluation for government
 expenditure, including environmental expenditure. As stated earlier, this DPL has already
 contributed to an inclusion of the environment sector in MEF's list of result-basedbudgeting.
 The SD and PREM teams-are working closely together to ensure close complementarities
 among both operations. The fiscal DPL has contributed in promoting a results-based
 budgeting for MINAM, which is in line with strengthening the environmental governance
 proposedunder the proposedproject.


0Peru Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Project. IFC's $300 million loan for the project was
 signed on June 26, 2008. This natural gas export project will support economic growth in
 some of Peru's poorest regions and will be the largest foreign direct investment in the
 country's history. Totaling $3.8 billion in costs, the Peru LNG project will also be Latin
 America's first liquefied natural gas export project. In addition to financing, IFC is advising
 Peru LNG to help optimize its environmental approach and ensure that local communities
 benefit. Also, IFC is developing programs to engage local, communities in monitoring the
 effects that the project will have on their lives. With IFC's support, Peru LNG is enhancing
 opportunities for local businesses to sell goods and services to the project, raising people's
 incomes andjob prospects. The proposed reforms under the ENVDPL are likely to strengthen
 the capacity of MINAM to evaluate, monitor and environmentally enforce large infrastructure
 projects. Thus, projects like CAMISEA and the Interoceanic Highway would also benefit in
 that the GoP would be better prepared to prevent, and if necessary address and mitigate any
 potential environmental impacts.




                                               62

              Annex 5: Social Impacts associated with Mining and Fisheries Sectors

TheMining Sector

Social dimensions have recently become widely recognized as a crucial element o f the impact
assessment exercise in Peru's mining sector. Following one of the recommendationsin the AAA on
the "Environmental and Social Dimensions of the Mining Sector in Peru" (2005), the GoP created
the Office of Social Affairs in MEM. The objectives and functioning of this office have evolved
since its creation in 2006 and is currently enhancingits position within the agenda of the Ministry of
Energy and Mines (MEM), including not only the mining sector, but the hydrocarbonand electricity
sub-sectors as well. This office is playing a critical role in enforcing the law of "Compromiso
Previo," which establishes a framework for mining activities to be are carried out in an
environmentally and socially responsible manner, and is supporting enhancing community
consultation, participatory monitoring of the industry, and the development of sustainable economic
plans for the affectedcommunities, in partnershipwith industry.

One of the main actions supported by this operation is the clean-upo f environmental legacies in the
mining sector. These actionswill entail positive social impacts resultingfrom decontaminatingwater
sources, soils and air, with consequent beneficialimpacts on public healthandjob creation. The DPL
also supports improving the participation of the locally affected communities, including indigenous
communities, in the monitoring of the mining industry. These participatory processes will be
developed in a tripartite fashion including the affected communities, the industry, and the
government. In some regions, IFC assistance is being provided for this purpose.Also supported are
the efforts to raise the quality o f environmental assessments and the provision of guidelines on
communication and resettlement by government to the industry. These guidelines are to be based
bothon the Bank safeguard policies and the recommendationsof the recent mining AAA.

Activities supported by this DPL also include those that will have positive social impacts for
Indigenous Peoples in Peru. The country's legal framework with regards to Indigenous Peoples'
rights to consultation and participation is well e~tablished~~.Although these regulations are not
always properly enforced, they nonetheless provide a legal platform for IndigenousPeoplei and the
Peoples' Ombudsmanto defend these rights.

The Fisheries Sector

For a long time, the fisheries sector in Peru -which has been characterized by a high degree of
informality, weak monitoring capacity, and poor enforcement of labor rights -has been plagued by
environmental and social problems.This situation, however, is beginningto change because of legal
steps taken by PRODUCE in the recent years.

The employment generated by the fisheries sector in Peru is considerable. The social impact study
commissioned by the Bank43on the commercial fishing of anchoveta reports 1247 vessels -half of




42Peru is signatory oftwo major international conventions: the 1LO 169 Convention and the recently approved
United Nations Declaration of Indigenous Peoples Rights which provide the legal framework for the way indigenous
peoples are consulted and the way they participate in the benefit sharing from project investments.
432008 Bernales, Antonio. "Estudio de linea base sobre la repercusion social de la reforma de la flota pesquerade
anchoveta en el Peru". Futuro Sostenible.


                                                          63

which comprisethe steel fleet and the other half the wooden fleet.44With around 16 crew members
working on average in each of these vessels, there are approximately 11,000 workers in the steel
fleet and 9,000 workers in the wooden fleet. Differences in the characteristics in the two fleet types
will likely result in varying social impacts as a result of government policy reforms in the fishery
sector. The steel fleet shows a high degree o f con~entration~~and is the more efficient, formalized
and best linked with fishmeal and fish oil plants. The wooden fleet, in contrast, lacks linkages to
fishmeal and fish oil plants, and is less efficient with its workers not benefittingfrom labor rights.
The wooden fleet workers are therefore morevulnerable to any measuresaimedat makingthe sector
moreefficient, less pollutingand more sustainable.

To garner efficiency gains and reduce overcapacity in the sector, some experts recommend a
reduction of 50 percent of the fleet in the medium and long term; while government officials are
considering the reform with the launch of the quota system will reduce the fleet by around 30
percent.Under the latter option, the social impact on the fleet workforce might be the loss of around
7,000 fleet workers who would have to move to other activities within the sector, go to other sectors,
or take an early retirement.

Incomesearned by fleet workers have also been suffering.Incomes generated by commercial fishing
vary accordingto the discharged volume and the market price. Crew members with higher expertise
earn muchmore that the commonworker (the latter earn less than around US$2,500 per year). With
continuing overcapacity in the sector, and an annual global quota, the current commercial fishing
season has been reduced to only 50 days per year in the central and northern coast and to 100 days
for the southern coast. Thus, the occupation is rapidly becoming an ancillary activity for fishermen,
although still more profitable in comparisonto the other activities in which they engage the rest of
the year. Interviewswith fishermen revealedthat duringthe off-season, they are typically involvedin
artisanal fishing, agriculture, handicrafts, as taxi drivers, technicians, etc.; while workers in the
wooded fleet typically turn to agriculture.

The level of organization inthe fisheries sector is also fairly low. Workers' unionsare characterized
by a very low participation, partly because they do not depend exclusively on income from fishing
activities to sustain their families. There are currentlythree unions-one o f which has 1200 members
out of the 11,000 working in the steel fleet. A union representingthe workers in the wooded fleet
was only recentlycreated (in 2007), and is incipient.

Restructuringconditions in the fisheries sector could have adverse social impacts in the short term.
The GOP has recently issued a Legislative Decree 1084 in which the new system of individual
quotas has been established. The same law also provides for mechanisms to mitigate the social
impacts resulting from the downsizing of the sector. The decree prohibits firing crew members and
allows only for voluntary retirements and rotation of workers. Also created is a social compensation
fund (FONCOPES) that will impose obligatory contribution^^^ to ship owners. This fund will

44The steel fleet has a storagecapacity that rangesbetween65 and over 421 cubic meters per vessel while the wood
fleet has only between 3 1.5 and 110 cubic metersper vessel.
45With 306 vessels owned by the largest seven companies(representing 70 percentof fleet and plant capacity), 37
vessels owned by 4 mediumsize companies(representing 7 percent of fleet and plant capacity), and 280 vessels
owned by small companieswith no integrationto fishmeal and oil plants.
46The amount will be determined in accordanceto the individual quotas and the number of workers per company.
These amounts will be determinedonce the government issues the regulation(Reglamento) for the decree-law 1084
which will includethe functioningof FONCOPES.


                                                        64

provide financing (a salary package) to support early retirementfor workers between 50 and 55 years
old; economic incentivesfor shifting to new economic activities for voluntary worker attrition, and a
program for the creation of micro enterprises, including training and technical assistance. The fund
will be financed exclusivelyby the private sector with no financial costs to the government.

In addition to the contributionsdescribedabove, the financingof a pensionfund will be supported by
the imposition (through Legislative Decree No. 1084) of a levy of USD 1.95 per metric ton of
landed anchoveta for a maximum of ten years. This levy is expected to result in a US$ 100 million
fund. The law also states that, during this period the governmentwill not change the current amount
of fishing rights that was approvedin 2006.

While the new legal decree has been welcomed by the large and more efficient vessel companies as
well as by environmentalists, the smaller boat builders have mostly opposed it for fear of losing
competitiveness. The fleet workers, however, have been more inclined to agree with the
compensationpackage for voluntary exit from commercial fishing, or to the entitlements on early
retirement. Two workers unions have issued public statements agreeing to the labor and social
provisions in the law.47However, at the same time, one of the main opposition parties has presented
a legal proposal in Congress to rescindthe decree that establishes the quota system. This proposal is
being supported by the association representing small ship owners who feel most impacted by the
new system. This represents a significant social risk whose outcome will depend on how other
parties in Congresspositionthemselves vis-&vis the government's quota law.

Another risk relates to the potential for workers leaving commercial anchoveta fishing for fishmeal    .

processing, thereby creatingextraordinary pressures on artisanal fishermen and fish resources. While
the GoP has frozen permits for new fishmeal plants, they are being opened on the southern coast.48
This situation has provoked claims from one union of artisanal fishermen that is concerned with the
fishery resource impacts of these plants.To addressthis, the Minister has agreed to review the permit
granting process and to revoke permits ifmistakes were made in their issuance.

The reform process of the fisheries sector is complex but necessary to enable this vital economic
agent and its workers to remain viable in the medium and long-term. While GoP's resolve to reach
consensus will be tested, the proposed operation supports social mitigation measures embedded in
the approved legislation.




48The government's position is that these permits were given beforethe freeze became effective.




                                                        65

                                                        Annex 6: Country at a Glance
 Peru at a glance                                                                                                                                 11/6/08

                                                                                      Latin        Lower          I
 Key Development Indicators                                                        America         middle
                                                                        Peru       B Carib.       income            Age distribution, 2007
(2007)                                                                                                                          Male                Female

Population.mid-year(millions)                                            28,2           563        3.437
Surface area (thousandsq. km)                                           1.285        20.421       35.510
Populationgrowth (%)                                                      1,1           1.2           1,o
Urban population(% of total population)                                     71           78           42

GNI (Atlas method,US$ billions)                                          95,O         3.118        6.485
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)                                      3.400         5.540         1.887
GNI per capita (PPP, international$)                                    7.240         9.320        4.544

GDP growth (%)                                                            8 3           5,7           9,7               15    10    5     0      5     10    15
GDP per capita growth (%)                                                 7,6           4 3           8,6                              percent

(most recent estimate, 2000-2007)

Povertyheadcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)                              13            8
Povertyheadcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)                              31           18                        Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Life expectancy at birth (years)                                            71           73           69
infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)                                    21           22           41           90

Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)                                   5            5           25           80
                                                                                                                   70

Adult literacy,male (% of ages 15 and older)                                94           91           93           60
                                                                                                                   50
Adult literacy,female (% of ages 15and older)                               82           89           85           40
Gross primaryenrollment, male (% of age group)                            116           120           112          30
Gross primaryenrollment,female (% of age group)                           117           116           109          20
                                                                                                                    10

Access to an improvedwater source (% of population)                         84           91           88            0

Access to improvedsanitation facilities (% of population)                   72           78           54                     1990   1995    2000    2006


                                                                                                                      OPew     0Latin America a the Caribbean


N e t Aid Flows                                            1980         1990          2000          2007 '

                                                                                                                                                               I
(US%millions)
Net ODA and omciai aid                                       201         397            398          468           Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
Top 3 donors (in 2006)
  UnitedStates                                                 53           79           92           187
  Spain                                                                      6           19           69
  European Commission                                           1           22           24           54

Aid (%of GNi)                                                  1,o        1,6           0.8           0,6
Aid per capita (US$)                                           12           18           15            17


Long-Term Economic Trends

Consumer prices (annual % change)                           60.1      7649.0            3,7           3.9
GDP implicit deflator (annual% change)                      65,9      6.836,9           3,7           2,o

Exchange rate (annual average,local per US$)                  0,o         0.2           3,5           3,1
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)                                         126           100          158
                                                                                                                     1980-90     1990-2000       2000-07
                                                                                                                          (average annualgrowth X )
Population,mid-year (millions)                              17,3         21,8          257           28,2                  2 3          1,6           1.2
GDP (US$ millions)                                        20.661      26.294         53.290      109.219                  -0,l          4,7           5 4
                                                                          ( X of GDP)
Agriculture     '                                           10.0          7,2           7-8           6,1
Industry                                                   36,8          22,9          27.3          33.8
  Manufacturing                                            20.2          14,9          14.4          145
Services                                                   39,l          53.7          56,2          51.6

Householdfinal consumptionexpenditure                       57,5         73,7          71,4          61,5
General gott final consumption expenditure                  103           7,9          10.6           9.1
Gross capital formation                                     29.0         16,5          20,2          22,9

Exports of goods and services                               22.4         15,8          16,O          28:9
imports of goods and services                               19,4         13,8          18,2         22.4
Gross savings                                                           19.3           20,2         23,6


Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2006.

Development Economics. DevelopmentData Group (DECDG)


                                                                                 66

                                                                                                                                                          Peru

Balance of Payments and Trade                                2000     2007
                                                                                       IGovemance Indicators, 2000 and 2007
(US$millions)
Total merchandiseexports (fob)                              6,955    27,956
Total merchandiseimports (cif)                              7,358    19,599              Voice and accountability

Net trade in goods and services                            -1,138     7,429                      Politicalstability

Current accountbalance                                     -1,546     1,505                    Regulatoryquality
   as a % of GDP                                               -2.9     1.4
                                                                                                       Rule of law
Workers' remittances and                                                                                                              I           1
   compensationof employees(receipts)                          718    2,131                   Control of wrruption

                                                                                                                   0     25          50           75     IW
Reserves, includinggold                                     8,563    21,720
                                                                                               02007                  Country's percentile rank (0-100)
Central Government Finance                                                                     02000                   hghr YLIIuebmpfy Mammps


(W of GDP)
Current revenue(includinggrants)                              14.9     17.9             S o u m Kaufrnann-Kraay-MaatrumWorld Bank

   Tax revenue                                                12.2     15.4
Current expenditure                                           15.1     12.5
                                                                                    Technology and Infrastructure                                2000     2007
Overall surplusldeficit                                        -2.8     1.8
                                                                                    Paved roads (% of total)                                      134     14 4
Highest marginaltax rate (%)                                                        Fixed line and mobile phone
   Individual                                                   20       30            subscribers(per 100people)                                   12      65
   Corporate                                                    30      30          High technologyexports
                                                                                       (% of manufacturedexports)                                  3 6     2 0
External Debt and Resource Flows
                                                                                     Environment
(US$ mi//ions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed                        28,639    32,155         Agricultural land (% of land area)                              17      17
Total debt service                                          2,571     7,405         Forestarea (% of land area)                                  541      53 7
Debt relief (HiPC, MDRI)                                         -       -          Nationallyprotected areas (% of land area)                            16 9

Total debt (% of GDP)                                         53.7     29.2         Freshwaterresources per capita (cu. meters)                         59,250
Total debt service(% of exports)            '                 27.8     22.5         Freshwaterwithdrawal (% of internalresources)                  1 2

Foreign direct Investment(net inflows)                         810    5,343         C02 emissions per capila (mt)                                  1 1     1 2
PoMoiio equity(net inflows)                                    123      130
                                                                                    GDP per unit of energyuse
                          f3                                                           (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)                      11 4    12 8
    Composition of total external debt, 2007

                                    IBRO. 2.649
                                        ,                                           Energyuse per capita (kg of oil equivalent)                   408      506
                                                 /IDA.    0

                Short-lerm 5 606                          IMF 0
                                                                                      World Bank Group portfollo                                 2000     2007
                                                     Other multi-
                                                    Ialerd 5 202                      (US$ mllllonsj

                                                                                      IBRD
                                                   Bllaleral 3 900                     Total debt outstandingand disbursed                      2,590    2,649
                                                                                       Disbursements                                              266      256
                                                                                       Principalrepayments                                          93     241
                                                                                       Interest payments
                    PrlYBte I 5 w2                                                                                                                 189     150

                                                                                      IDA
                                                                                       Total debt outstandingand disbursed
                                                                                       Disbursements
Private Sector Development                                   2000     2008             Total debt service                                                    ---

Time requiredto start a business (days)                                 65            IFC (fiscalyead
Cost to start a business(% of GNI per capita)                    --    25.7            Total disbursed and outstandingportfolio                   292      324
Time requiredto register property(days)                          -      33              of which IFC own account                                   157     311
                                                                                       Disbursementsfor iFC own account                             70     148
Ranked as a major constraintto business                      2000     2007             Portfolio sales, prepaymentsand
   (% of managerssurveyed who agreed)                                                   repaymentsfor IFC own account                               10      24
    Anticompetitiveor informal practices                          ..  22.1
    Tax administration                                            ..  17.9           MlGA
                                                                                       Gross exposure                                             329        8
Stock market capitalization(% of GDP)                         19.8    98.8             New guarantees                                              40        0
Bank capnalto assetratio (%)                                   9.1      8.6


Note: Figures in italicsare for years otherthan those specified. 2007 data are preliminary.                                                             11/6/08
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.

DevelopmentEconomics,DevelopmentData Group (DECDG).




                                                                              67

Millennium Development Goals                                                                                                                      Peru


With selected targets to achieve between 1990and 2015
(esbmate closest to dateshown, +/- 2 years)                                                                            Peru


Goal 1:halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition                                             1990         1995          2000          2007
 Povertyheadcount ratioat $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
 Povertyheadcount ratio at nationalpovertyline (% of population)                                                                   543            53,l
 Share of income or consumptionto the poorest qunitile(%)                                                5,6          4.4            3,O           3.7
 Prevalence of malnutrition(% of children under 5)                                                       8,8          5,7            5 2

Goal 2: ensure that chlldren are able to complete prlmary schoollng
 Primaryschool enrollment(net, %)                                                                        88                           96           96
 Primarycompletionrate (% of relevant age group)                                                                                     103          101
 Secondary schoolenrollment(gross, %)                                                                    67                           07           94
 Youth literacyrate (% of peopleages 15-24)                                                                           95                           97

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity Ineducation and empower women
 Ratio of girls to boys in primaryand secondary education (%)                                            96                           97          101
 Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagriculturalemployment)                                         31              33           38
 Proportionof seats held bywomen in nationalparliament(%)                                                  6          1 1             11           29

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
 Under-5mortalityrate (per 1,000)                                                                        70           63              41           25
 Infant mortality rate (per 1,000live births)                                                            56           40              33           21
 Measles immunization(proportionof oneyear olds immunized,%)                                             64           98              97           99


Goal 5: reduce maternal mortailty by three-fourths
 Maternal mortalityratio (modeledestimate, per 100,000live births)                                                                                240
 Births attended by skilled healthstaff (% of total)                                                     80           56              59           87
 Contraceptive prevalence(% of women ages 1549)                                                          59           64              69           46

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HlVlAlDS and other majordiseases
 Prevalence of HIV (% of populationages 1549)                                                                                        0,4           0.5
 Incidenceof tuberculosis(per 100,000people)                                                             360         295             225          162
 Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)                                                                           101             07           96

Goal 7: halvethe proportlon of people without sustainable access to bask needs
 Access to an improvedwater source(% of population)                                                      75           79              81           84
 Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)                                              55           60              65           72
 Forest area (% of total landarea)
 Nationallyprotectedareas (% of total land area)
 C02 emissions(metrictons per capita)
 GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
 Telephone mainlines(per 100people)                                                                      2,6          4 5            6,7           9,6
 Mobile phone subscribers (per 100people)                                                                0,o          0 3            5.0          55.3
 internet users (per 100 people)                                                                         0,o          0,o            3,l          27,4
 Personalcomputers (per 100 people)                                                                                   1 3            4,1          10,3



  Education Indicators (%)                                kasles immunization (Yoof 1-yearolds)              ICT indicaton (per 100 people)

  125                                                     100                                               70

  100                                                                                                       60
                                                           15
   15                                                                                                       50

   50                                                                                                       40
                                                           50                                               30
   25                                                                                                       20
    0                                                     25
 n       2000        2w2         2w4       2006                                                             10

                                                            0                                                0
                                                                      1940   1995    2000    2006                  2000     2002      2004    2006
       &Pnmary         net enrollment ratio

       +Ralio       01 girls lo boys In pnmary &                                                      I              0Fixed + mobile subscnben
                                                              0 Peru    0LatinAmenca &the Canbbean          I
              Seconda education                                                                        I             Olntemetuse,6
                                                                                                            I



Note: Figures in italicsare for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.                                        11/6/00

Development Economics. Development Data Group (DECDG).




                                                                               68

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IBRD 33465R

                       80W                                                                                                       7575W                                                                                                         7070W
0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                          ECUADORECUADOR                                                                           ArcadiaArcadia                          COLOMBIACOLOMBIA

                                                                                                                                                 Napo

                                                                                                               Corrientes                                                            Putumayo
                                                                                                                                  Puerto Curaray
                                                                                                                                  Puerto Curaray
                                                                                                                             Tigre

                           To
                           To
                         MachalaMachala
      Tumbes                                                                                                                                                                                                   Amazonas
    TUMBESTUMBES                                                 Santiago
                              To
                              To                             A
                             LojaLoja                                                        Pastaza                                                          Iquitos
                                                                                                                                                              Iquitos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CaballocochaCaballococha

                                                                                                                          L O R E T O                                                                                                                                        BRAZIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BRAZIL
     Talara
     alara                                                 MA                    Ayar Manco
                                                                                      ar Manco                                                                                            Yavari
        SullanaSullana                                       ZO
5S          P I U R A                       SanSan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5S

             PiuraPiura   A              CA  IgnacioIgnacio    N                           Maraon                                                           Ucayali

                             n
                                                                                                                 Yurimaguas
                                                                                                                       urimaguas                     Tamnco
                                                                                                                                                     amnco
                                       d   JAM                  AS

                                                   Chachapoyas
                                                   Chachapoyas
                                                                                      Moyobamba
                                                                                      Moyobamba
        LAMBA-                            e                                           Tarapoto
                                                                                      arapoto

         YEQUE                                                                    S A N
                           Chiclayo
                           Chiclayo                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PERU
                                              s
                                              ARCA
                                                                               M A R T I N
                                                    Cajamarca
                                                    Cajamarca
                                                                                                                                                                      To
                                                                                                                                                                      To
                                                                                                                                                                    CruzeiroCruzeiro
                                                                                                                                                                    do Sul
                                                                                                                                                                    do Sul

                             Trujillo                                                                        SantaSanta
                                                                                                             LuciaLucia
                           LA LIBE
                           LA LIBERTARTAD
                                       LIBERTAD                                                                                                    Pucallpa
                                                                                                                                                   Pucallpa

                                                               NevadaNevada    SihuasSihuas
                                                           HueascarnHueascarn
                                        Chimbote              (6768 m)
                                                              (6768 m)                              Hualaga
                                                              ANCASHANCASH                                             Tingo Mara
                                                                                                                         ngo Mara

                                                                Huaraz
                                                                Huaraz                              HUANUCOHUANUCO                                  Ucayali

                                                                                                                       Hunuco
                                                                                                                       Hunuco
10S                                                                      NevadaNevada
                                                                          Yerupaja
                                                                           erupaja                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1010S
                                                                          (6634 m)
                                                                          (6634 m)                                                                          U C A Y A L 

                                                                               GoyllarisquizgaGoyllarisquizga           P A S C O                                                                             Purs
                                                                                            M                  Cerro de
                                                                                                               Cerro de
              PACIFIC                                                                                                  Pasco
                                                                                                                       Pasco
                                                                Huacho            SaynSayn
                                                                                                                                   SatipoSatipo                                     AtalayaAtalaya

              OCEAN                                                              L I M A t                              LaLa
                                             C A L L A O                                                        n       OroyaOroyaJ U N I N           Apurimac                                                                M A D R E

                                                                           Callao          LIMALIMA                     s         Huancayo
                                                                                                                                  Huancayo                               Urubamba                               Madre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D E D I O S

                                                                                                                            .                                                                                               de                            PuertoPuerto
                                                                                                                                                    AynaAy            C U S C O                                               Dios
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SintuyaSintuya                     Maldonado
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Maldonado
                                                                                                               Huancavelica
                                                                                                               Huancavelica
    0         100            200                   300 Kilometers                                                                                                QuillabambaQuillabamba
                                                                                                                            HUANCA-HUANCA-                                                        NevadaNevada
                                                                                                                                                           Ayacucho
                                                                                                                                                              acucho                      SalcantaySalcantay
                                                                                                                             VELICAVELICA                                                 (6271 m)
                                                                                                                                                                                          (6271 m)                            LanlacuniLanlacuni           AstilleroAstillero
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BajoBajo
    0                     100                       200 Miles
                                                                                               Pisco


                                                                                                                       I C A                     AYACUCHO URIMAlcaAlca
                                                                                                                                                               AP                                      Cusco
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cusco
                                                                                                                                                                                    Abancay
                                                                                                                                                                                    Abancay                                   NudoNudo              Inambari
                                                                                                                          Ica
                                                                                                                          Ica                                                                                       AusandateAusandate
                                                                                                                                                                                     AC                             (6384 m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (6384 m)                    P U N O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 To San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BuenaventuraBuenaventura
                                                                                                                                               PuquioPuquio
                       PERU                                                                                    Caballas                NazcaNazca
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CaillomaCailloma                                                                           1515S

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               To
                                                                                                                        San Juan                                                         NevadaNevada                                 JuliacaJuliaca
                                                                                                                                                                                         CoropunaCoropuna                                                                    CarabucoCarabuco
              SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS                                                                                                                                                  (6271 m)
                                                                                                                                                                                         (6271 m)             Andes                                           Lago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Titicaca
              REGION CAPITALS                                                                                                         Antiquipa                     A R E Q U I P A                                                       PunoPuno

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             To
              NATIONAL CAPITAL                                                                                                                              Atico                          Arequipa
                                                                                                                                                                                           Arequipa                           Mtns.                                                  La Paz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     La Paz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DesaguaderoDesaguadero
              RIVERS

              MAIN ROADS                                                                                                                                                              Mollendo                Moquega
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Moquega

              RAILROADS                                                                                                                                                 MOQUEGUA                                                   T A C N A

              REGION BOUNDARIES                                                                                                                                                                                                                             To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            To                BOLIVIABOLIVIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tacna
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   acna                   Visviri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            isviri

              INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES                                                                                                                                                                                                                 To Beln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Beln

                                                                                                                                  75W                                                                                         To Iquique           CHILE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHILE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOVEMBER 2006

